"Not much use, if we have been seen
coming here,” said Dori, who was always
looking up towards the Mountain’s peak, as if
he expected to see Smaug perched there like a
bird on a steeple.

“We must take our chance of that,” said
Thorin. “We can go no further to-day.”

“Hear, hear!” cried Bilbo, and flung himself
on the ground.

In the rock-chamber there would have been
room for a hundred, and there was a small
chamber further in, more removed from the cold
outside. It was quite deserted; not even wild



animals seemed to have used it in all the days
of Smaug’s dominion. There they laid their
burdens; and some threw themselves down at
once and slept, but the others sat near the outer
door and discussed their plans. In all their talk
they came perpetually back to one thing: where
was Smaug? They looked West and there was
nothing, and East there was nothing, and in the
South there was no sign of the dragon, but there
was a gathering of very many birds. At that they
gazed and wondered; but they were no nearer
understanding it, when the first cold stars came
out.




Chapter XIV


FIRE AND WATER


Now if you wish, like the dwarves, to hear news
of Smaug, you must go back again to the
evening when he smashed the door and flew off
in rage, two days before.

The men of the lake-town Esgaroth were
mostly indoors, for the breeze was from the
black East and chill, but a few were walking on
the quays, and watching, as they were fond of
doing, the stars shine out from the smooth
patches of the lake as they opened in the sky.
From their town the Lonely Mountain was mostly
screened by the low hills at the far end of the
lake, through a gap in which the Running River
came down from the North. Only its high peak
could they see in clear weather, and they
looked seldom at it, for it was ominous and
drear even in the light of morning. Now it was
lost and gone, blotted in the dark.

Suddenly it flickered back to view; a brief


glow touched it and faded.

“Look!” said one. “The lights again! Last
night the watchmen saw them start and fade
from midnight until dawn. Something is
happening up there.”

“Perhaps the King under the Mountain is
forging gold,” said another. “It is long since he
went North. It is time the songs began to prove
themselves again.”

“Which king?” said another with a grim
voice. “As like as not it is the marauding fire of
the Dragon, the only king under the Mountain
we have ever known.”

“You are always foreboding gloomy things!”
said the others. “Anything from floods to
poisoned fish. Think of something cheerful!”

Then suddenly a great light appeared in the
low place in the hills and the northern end of the
lake turned golden. “The King beneath the
Mountain!” they shouted. “His wealth is like the
Sun, his silver like a fountain, his rivers golden
run! The river is running gold from the
Mountain!” they cried, and everywhere windows
were opening and feet were hurrying.

There was once more a tremendous
excitement and enthusiasm. But the grim-
voiced fellow ran hotfoot to the Master. “The
dragon is coming or I am a fool!” he cried. “Cut
the bridges! To arms! To arms!”



Then warning trumpets were suddenly
sounded, and echoed along the rocky shores.
The cheering stopped and the joy was turned to
dread. So it was that the dragon did not find
them quite unprepared.

Before long, so great was his speed, they
could see him as a spark of fire rushing
towards them and growing ever huger and
more bright, and not the most foolish doubted
that the prophecies had gone rather wrong. Still
they had a little time. Every vessel in the town
was filled with water, every warrior was armed,
every arrow and dart was ready, and the bridge
to the land was thrown down and destroyed,
before the roar of Smaug’s terrible approach
grew loud, and the lake rippled red as fire
beneath the awful beating of his wings.

Amid shrieks and wailing and the shouts of
men he came over them, swept towards the
bridges and was foiled! The bridge was gone,
and his enemies were on an island in deep
water — too deep and dark and cool for his
liking. If he plunged into it, a vapour and a
steam would arise enough to cover all the land
with a mist for days; but the lake was mightier
than he, it would quench him before he could
pass through.

Roaring he swept back over the town. A hail
of dark arrows leaped up and snapped and



rattled on his scales and jewels, and their shafts
fell back kindled by his breath burning and
hissing into the lake. No fireworks you ever
imagined equalled the sights that night. At the
twanging of the bows and the shrilling of the
trumpets the dragon’s wrath blazed to its height,
till he was blind and mad with it. No one had
dared to give battle to him for many an age; nor
would they have dared now, if it had not been
for the grim-voiced man (Bard was his name),
who ran to and fro cheering on the archers and
urging the Master to order them to fight to the
last arrow.

Fire leaped from the dragon’s jaws. He
circled for a while high in the air above them
lighting all the lake; the trees by the shores
shone like copper and like blood with leaping
shadows of dense black at their feet. Then
down he swooped straight through the arrow-
storm, reckless in his rage, taking no heed to
turn his scaly sides towards his foes, seeking
only to set their town ablaze.

Fire leaped from thatched roofs and
wooden beam-ends as he hurtled down and
past and round again, though all had been
drenched with water before he came. Once
more water was flung by a hundred hands
wherever a spark appeared. Back swirled the
dragon. A sweep of his tail and the roof of the



Great House crumbled and smashed down.
Flames unquenchable sprang high into the
night. Another swoop and another, and another
house and then another sprang afire and fell;
and still no arrow hindered Smaug or hurt him
more than a fly from the marshes.


Already men were jumping into the water on
every side. Women and children were being
huddled into laden boats in the market-pool.
Weapons were flung down. There was
mourning and weeping, where but a little time
ago the old songs of mirth to come had been
sung about the dwarves. Now men cursed their
names. The Master himself was turning to his
great gilded boat, hoping to row away in the
confusion and save himself. Soon all the town
would be deserted and burned down to the
surface of the lake.

That was the dragon’s hope. They could all
get into boats for all he cared. There he could
have fine sport hunting them, or they could stop
till they starved. Let them try to get to land and
he would be ready. Soon he would set all the
shoreland woods ablaze and wither every field
and pasture. Just now he was enjoying the sport
of town-baiting more than he had enjoyed



anything for years.

But there was still a company of archers
that held their ground among the burning
houses. Their captain was Bard, grim-voiced
and grim-faced, whose friends had accused
him of prophesying floods and poisoned fish,
though they knew his worth and courage. He
was a descendant in long line of Girion, Lord of
Dale, whose wife and child had escaped down
the Running River from the ruin long ago. Now
he shot with a great yew bow, till all his arrows
but one were spent. The flames were near him.
His companions were leaving him. He bent his
bow for the last time.

S ud d e nly o ut of the d a rk so methi ng fl utte red
to his shoulder. He started — but it was only an
old thrush. Unafraid it perched by his ear and it
brought him news. Marvelling he found he could
understand its tongue, for he was of the race of
Dale.

“Wait! Wait!” it said to him. “The moon is
rising. Look for the hollow of the left breast as
he flies and turns above you!” And while Bard
paused in wonder it told him of tidings up in the
Mountain and of all that it had heard.

Then Bard drew his bow-string to his ear.
The dragon was circling back, flying low, and as
he came the moon rose above the eastern
shore and silvered his great wings.



“Arrow!” said the bowman. “Black arrow! I
have saved you to the last. You have never
failed me and always I have recovered you. I
had you from my father and he from of old. If
ever you came from the forges of the true king
under the Mountain, go nowand speed well!”

The dragon swooped once more lower than
ever, and as he turned and dived down his belly
glittered white with sparkling fires of gems in
the moon — but not in one place. The great bow
twanged. The black arrow sped straight from
the string, straight for the hollow by the left
breast where the foreleg was flung wide. In it
smote and vanished, barb, shaft and feather, so
fierce was its flight. With a shriek that deafened
men, felled trees and split stone, Smaug shot
spouting into the air, turned over and crashed
down from on high in ruin.

Full on the town he fell. His last throes
splintered it to sparks and gledes. The lake
roared in. A vast steam leaped up, white in the
sudden dark under the moon. There was a hiss,
a gushing whirl, and then silence. And that was
the end of Smaug and Esgaroth, but not of
Bard.


The waxing moon rose higher and higher and



the wind grew loud and cold. It twisted the white
fog into bending pillars and hurrying clouds and
drove it off to the West to scatter in tattered
shreds over the marshes before Mirkwood.
Then the many boats could be seen dotted dark
on the surface of the lake, and down the wind
came the voices of the people of Esgaroth
lamenting their lost town and goods and ruined
houses. But they had really much to be thankful
for, had they thought of it, though it could hardly
be expected that they should just then: three
quarters of the people of the town had at least
escaped alive; their woods and fields and
pastures and cattle and most of their boats
remained undamaged; and the dragon was
dead. What that meant they had not yet
realized.

They gathered in mournful crowds upon the
western shores, shivering in the cold wind, and
their first complaints and anger were against
the Master, who had left the town so soon, while
some were still willing to defend it.

“He may have a good head for business —
especially his own business,” some murmured,
“but he is no good when anything serious
happens!” And they praised the courage of
Bard and his last mighty shot. “If only he had not
been killed,” they all said, “we would make him
a king. Bard the Dragon-shooter of the line of



Girion! Alas that he is lost!”

And in the very midst of theirtalk a tall figure
stepped from the shadows. He was drenched
with water, his black hair hung wet over his face
and shoulders, and a fierce light was in his
eyes.

“Bard is not lost!” he cried. “He dived from
Esgaroth, when the enemy was slain. I am
Bard, of the line of Girion; I am the slayer of the
dragon!”

“King Bard! King Bard!” they shouted; but
the Master ground his chattering teeth.

“Girion was lord of Dale, not king of
Esgaroth,” he said. “In the Lake-town we have
always elected masters from among the old
and wise, and have not endured the rule of
mere fighting men. Let ‘King Bard’ go back to
his own kingdom — Dale is now freed by his
valour, and nothing hinders his return. And any
that wish can go with him, if they prefer the cold
stones under the shadow of the Mountain to the
green shores of the lake. The wise will stay here
and hope to rebuild our town, and enjoy again in
time its peace and riches.”

“We will have King Bard!” the people near
at hand shouted in reply. “We have had enough
of the old men and the money-counters!” And
people further off took up the cry: “Up the
Bowman, and down with Moneybags,” till the



clamour echoed along the shore.

“I am the last man to undervalue Bard the
Bowman,” said the Master warily (for Bard now
stood close beside him). “He has tonight
earned an eminent place in the roll of the
benefactors of our town; and he is worthy of
many imperishable songs. But, why O
People?” — and here the Master rose to his feet
and spoke very loud and clear — “Why do I get
all your blame? For what fault am I to be
deposed? Who aroused the dragon from his
slumber, I might ask? Who obtained of us rich
gifts and ample help, and led us to believe that
old songs could come true? Who played on our
soft hearts and our pleasant fancies? What sort
of gold have they sent down the river to reward
us? Dragon-fire and ruin! From whom should
we claim the recompense of our damage, and
aid for our widows and orphans?”

As you see, the Master had not got his
position for nothing. The result of his words was
that for the moment the people quite forgot their
idea of a new king, and turned their angry
thoughts towards Thorin and his company. Wild
and bitter words were shouted from many
sides; and some of those who had before sung
the old songs loudest, were now heard as loudly
crying that the dwarves had stirred the dragon
up against them deliberately!



“Fools!” said Bard. “Why waste words and
wrath on those unhappy creatures? Doubtless
they perished first in fire, before Smaug came
to us.” Then even as he was speaking, the
thought came into his heart of the fabled
treasure of the Mountain lying without guard or
owner, and he fell suddenly silent. He thought of
the Master’s words, and of Dale rebuilt, and
filled with golden bells, if he could but find the
men.

At length he spoke again: “This is no time
for angry words, Master, or for considering
weighty plans of change. There is work to do. I
serve you still — though after a while I may think
again of your words and go North with any that
will follow me.”

Then he strode off to help in the ordering of
the camps and in the care of the sick and the
wounded. But the Master scowled at his back
as he went, and remained sitting on the ground.
He thought much but said little, unless it was to
call loudly for men to bring him fire and food.

Now everywhere Bard went he found talk
running like fire among the people concerning
the vast treasure that was now unguarded. Men
spoke of the recompense for all their harm that
they would soon get from it, and wealth over
and to spare with which to buy rich things from
the South; and it cheered them greatly in their



plight. That was as well, for the night was bitter
and miserable. Shelters could be contrived for
few (the Master had one) and there was little
food (even the Master went short). Many took ill
of wet and cold and sorrow that night, and
afterwards died, who had escaped uninjured
from the ruin of the town; and in the days that
followed there was much sickness and great
hunger.

Meanwhile Bard took the lead, and ordered
things as he wished, though always in the
Master’s name, and he had a hard task to
govern the people and direct the preparations
for their protection and housing. Probably most
of them would have perished in the winter that
now hurried after autumn, if help had not been
to hand. But help came swiftly; for Bard at once
had speedy messengers sent up the river to the
Forest to ask the aid of the King of the Elves of
the Wood, and these messengers had found a
host already on the move, although it was then
only the third day after the fall of Smaug.

The Elvenking had received news from his
own messengers and from the birds that loved
his folk, and already knew much of what had
happened. Very great indeed was the
commotion among all things with wings that
dwelt on the borders of the Desolation of the
Dragon. The air was filled with circling flocks,



and their swift-flying messengers flew here and
there across the sky. Above the borders of the
Forest there was whistling, crying and piping.
Far over Mirkwood tidings spread: “Smaug is
dead!” Leaves rustled and startled ears were
lifted. Even before the Elvenking rode forth the
news had passed west right to the pinewoods
of the Misty Mountains; Beorn had heard it in
his wooden house, and the goblins were at
council in their caves.

“That will be the last we shall hear of Thorin
Oakenshield, I fear,” said the king. “He would
have done better to have remained my guest. It
is an ill wind, all the same,” he added, “that
blows no one any good.” For he too had not
forgotten the legend of the wealth of Thror. So it
was that Bard’s messengers found him now
marching with many spearmen and bowmen;
and crows were gathered thick above him, for
they thought that war was awakening again,
such as had not been in those parts for a long
age.

But the king, when he received the prayers
of Bard, had pity, for he was the lord of a good
and kindly people; so turning his march, which
had at first been direct towards the Mountain,
he hastened now down the river to the Long
Lake. He had not boats or rafts enough for his
host, and they were forced to go the slower way



by foot; but great store of goods he sent ahead
by water. Still elves are light-footed, and though
they were not in these days much used to the
marches and the treacherous lands between
the Forest and the Lake, their going was swift.
Only five days after the death of the dragon they
came upon the shores and looked on the ruins
of the town. Their welcome was good, as may
be expected, and the men and their Master
were ready to make any bargain for the future in
return for the Elvenking’s aid.

Their plans were soon made. With the
women and the children, the old and the unfit,
the Master remained behind; and with him were
some men of crafts and many skilled elves; and
they busied themselves felling trees, and
collecting the timber sent down from the Forest.
Then they set about raising many huts by the
shore against the oncoming winter; and also
under the Master’s direction they began the
planning of a new town, designed more fair and
large even than before, but not in the same
place. They removed northward higher up the
shore; for ever after they had a dread of the
water where the dragon lay. He would never
again return to his golden bed, but was
stretched cold as stone, twisted upon the floor
of the shallows. There for ages his huge bones
could be seen in calm weather amid the ruined



piles of the old town. But few dared to cross the
cursed spot, and none dared to dive into the
shivering water or recover the precious stones
that fell from his rotting carcase.

But all the men of arms who were still able,
and the most of the Elvenking’s array, got ready
to march north to the Mountain. It was thus that
in eleven days from the ruin of the town the
head of their host passed the rock-gates at the
end of the lake and came into the desolate
lands.




Chapter XV


THE GATHERING OF THE

CLOUDS


Now we will return to Bilbo and the dwarves. All
night one of them had watched, but when
morning came they had not heard or seen any
sign of danger. But ever more thickly the birds
were gathering. Their companies came flying
from the South; and the crows that still lived
about the Mountain were wheeling and crying
unceasingly above.

“Something strange is happening,” said
Thorin. “The time has gone for the autumn
wanderings; and these are birds that dwell
always in the land; there are starlings and flocks
of finches; and far off there are many carrion
birds as if a battle were afoot!”

Suddenly Bilbo pointed: “There is that old
thrush again!” he cried. “He seems to have
escaped, when Smaug smashed the mountain-
side, but I don’t suppose the snails have!”


Sure enough the old thrush was there, and
as Bilbo pointed, he flew towards them and
perched on a stone near by. Then he fluttered
his wings and sang; then he cocked his head
on one side, as if to listen; and again he sang,
and again he listened.

“I believe he is trying to tell us something,”
said Balin; ‘‘but I cannot follow the speech of
such birds, it is very quick and difficult. Can you
make it out Baggins?”

"Not very well,” said Bilbo (as a matter of
fact, he could make nothing of it at all); “but the
old fellow seems very excited.”

“I only wish he was a raven!” said Balin.

“I thought you did not like them! You
seemed very shy of them, when we came this
way before.”

“Those were crows! And nasty suspicious-
looking creatures at that, and rude as well. You
must have heard the ugly names they were
calling after us. But the ravens are different.
There used to be great friendship between
them and the people of Thror; and they often
brought us secret news, and were rewarded
with such bright things as they coveted to hide
in their dwellings.

“They live many a year, and their memories
are long, and they hand on their wisdom to their
children. I knew many among the ravens of the



rocks when I was a dwarf-lad. This very height
was once named Ravenhill, because there was
a wise and famous pair, old Care and his wife,
that lived here above the guard-chamber. But I
don’t suppose that any of that ancient breed
linger here now.”

No sooner had he finished speaking than
the old thrush gave a loud call, and immediately
flew away.

“We may not understand him, but that old
bird understands us, I am sure,” said Balin.
“Keep watch now, and see what happens!”

Before long there was a fluttering of wings,
and back came the thrush; and with him came a
most decrepit old bird. He was getting blind, he
could hardly fly, and the top of his head was
bald. He was an aged raven of great size. He
alighted stiffly on the ground before them, slowly
flapped his wings, and bobbed towards Thorin.

“O Thorin son of Thrain, and Balin son of
Fundin,” he croaked (and Bilbo could
understand what he said, for he used ordinary
language and not bird-speech). “I am Roac son
of Care. Care is dead, but he was well known to
you once. It is a hundred years and three and
fifty since I came out of the egg, but I do not
forget what my father told me. Now I am the
chief of the great ravens of the Mountain. We
are few, but we remember still the king that was



of old. Most of my people are abroad, for there
are great tidings in the South — some are
tidings of joy to you, and some you will not think
so good.

“Behold! the birds are gathering back again
to the Mountain and to Dale from South and
East and West, for word has gone out that
Smaug is dead!”

“Dead! Dead?” shouted the dwarves.
“Dead! Then we have been in needless fear —
and the treasure is ours!” They all sprang up
and began to caper about for joy.

“Yes, dead,” said Roac. “The thrush, may
his feathers never fall, saw him die, and we may
trust his words. He saw him fall in battle with the
men of Esgaroth the third night back from now
at the rising of the moon.”

It was some time before Thorin could bring
the dwarves to be silent and listen to the raven’s
news. At length when he had told all the tale of
the battle he went on:

“So much for joy, Thorin Oakenshield. You
may go back to your halls in safety; all the
treasure is yours — for the moment. But many
are gathering hither beside the birds. The news
of the death of the guardian has already gone
far and wide, and the legend of the wealth of
Thror has not lost in the telling during many
years; many are eager for a share of the spoil.



Already a host of the elves is on the way, and
carrion birds are with them hoping for battle and
slaughter. By the lake men murmur that their
sorrows are due to the dwarves; for they are
homeless and many have died, and Smaug has
destroyed their town. They too think to find
amends from your treasure, whether you are
alive or dead.

“Your own wisdom must decide your
course; but thirteen is small remnant of the
great folk of Durin that once dwelt here, and
now are scattered far. If you will listen to my
counsel, you will not trust the Master of the
Lake-men, but rather him that shot the dragon
with his bow. Bard is he, of the race of Dale, of
the line of Girion; he is a grim man but true. We
would see peace once more among dwarves
and men and elves after the long desolation; but
it may cost you dear in gold. I have spoken.”

Then Thorin burst forth in anger: “Our
thanks, Roac Care’s son. You and your people
shall not be forgotten. But none of our gold shall
thieves take or the violent carry off while we are
alive. If you would earn our thanks still more,
bring us news of any that draw near. Also I
would beg of you, if any of you are still young
and strong of wing, that you would send
messengers to our kin in the mountains of the
North, both west from here and east, and tell



them of our plight. But go specially to my cousin
Dain in the Iron Hills, for he has many people
well-armed, and dwells nearest to this place.
Bid him hasten!”

“I will not say if this counsel be good or
bad,” croaked Roac, “but I will do what can be
done.” Then off he slowly flew.

“Back now to the Mountain!” cried Thorin.
“We have little time to lose.”

“And little food to use!” cried Bilbo, always
practical on such points. In any case he felt that
the adventure was, properly speaking, over with
the death of the dragon — in which he was much
mistaken — and he would have given most of his
share of the profits for the peaceful winding up
of these affairs.

“Back to the Mountain!” cried the dwarves
as if they had not heard him; so back he had to
go with them.


As you have heard some of the events already,
you will see that the dwarves still had some
days before them. They explored the caverns
once more, and found, as they expected, that
only the Front Gate remained open; all the other
gates (except, of course, the small secret door)
had long ago been broken and blocked by



Smaug, and no sign of them remained. So now
they began to labour hard in fortifying the main
entrance, and in making a new path that led
from it. Tools were to be found in plenty that the
miners and quarriers and builders of old had
used; and at such work the dwarves were still
very skilled.

As they worked the ravens brought them
constant tidings. In this way they learned that the
Elvenking had turned aside to the Lake, and
they still had a breathing space. Better still, they
heard that three of their ponies had escaped
and were wandering wild far down the banks of
the Running River, not far from where the rest of
their stores had been left. So while the others
went on with their work, Fili and Kili were sent,
guided by a raven, to find the ponies and bring
back all they could.

They were four days gone, and by that time
they knew that the joined armies of the Lake-
men and the Elves were hurrying toward the
Mountain. But now their hopes were higher; for
they had food for some weeks with care —
chiefly cram, of course, and they were very tired
of it; but cram is much better than nothing — and
already the gate was blocked with a wall of
squared stones laid dry, but very thick and high,
across the opening. There were holes in the
wall through which they could see (or shoot), but



no entrance. They climbed in or out with
ladders, and hauled stuff up with ropes. For the
issuing of the stream they had contrived a small
low arch under the new wall; but near the
entrance they had so altered the narrow bed
that a wide pool stretched from the mountain-
wall to the head of the fall over which the stream
went towards Dale. Approach to the Gate was
now only possible, without swimming, along a
narrow ledge of the cliff, to the right as one
looked outwards from the wall. The ponies they
had brought only to the head of the steps above
the old bridge, and unloading them there had
bidden them return to their masters and sent
them back riderless to the South.


There came a night when suddenly there were
many lights as of fires and torches away south
in Dale before them.

“They have come!” called Balin. “And their
camp is very great. They must have come into
the valley under the cover of dusk along both
banks of the river.”

That night the dwarves slept little. The
morning was still pale when they saw a
company approaching. From behind their wall
they watched them come up to the valley’s head



and climb slowly up. Before long they could see
that both men of the lake armed as if for war
and elvish bowmen were among them. At length
the foremost of these climbed the tumbled
rocks and appeared at the top of the falls; and
very great was their surprise to see the pool
before them and the Gate blocked with a wall of
new-hewn stone.

As they stood pointing and speaking to one
another Thorin hailed them: “Who are you,” he
called in a very loud voice, “that come as if in
war to the gates of Thorin son of Thrain, King
under the Mountain, and what do you desire?”

But they answered nothing. Some turned
swiftly back, and the others after gazing for a
while at the Gate and its defences soon
followed them. That day the camp was moved
to the east of the river, right between the arms
of the Mountain. The rocks echoed then with
voices and with song, as they had not done for
many a day. There was the sound, too, of elven-
harps and of sweet music; and as it echoed up
towards them it seemed that the chill of the air
was warmed, and they caught faintly the
fragrance of woodland flowers blossoming in
spring.

Then Bilbo longed to escape from the dark
fortress and to go down and join in the mirth
and feasting by the fires. Some of the younger



dwarves were moved in their hearts, too, and
they muttered that they wished things had fallen
out otherwise and that they might welcome such
folk as friends; but Thorin scowled.

Then the dwarves themselves brought forth
harps and instruments regained from the hoard,
and made music to soften his mood; but their
song was not as elvish song, and was much like
the song they had sung long before in Bilbo’s
little hobbit-hole.


Under the Mountain dark and tall
The King has come unto his hall!
His foe is dead, the Worm of Dread,
And ever so his foes shall fall.


The sword is sharp, the spear is long,
The arrow swift, the Gate is strong;

The heart is bold that looks on gold;

The dwarves no more shall suffer wrong.


The dwarves of yore made mighty spells,
While hammers fell like ringing bells



In places deep, where dark things sleep,
In hollowhalls beneath the fells.


On silver necklaces they strung
The light of stars, on crowns they hung
The dragon-fire, from twisted wire
The melody of harps they wrung.


The mountain throne once more is freed!
O! wandering folk, the summons heed!
Come haste! Come haste! across the
waste!

The king of friend and kin has need.


Now cal I we over mountains cold,
‘Come back unto the caverns old’!
Here at the Gates the king awaits,

His hands are rich with gems and gold.



The king is come unto his hall
Under the Mountain dark and tall.

The Worm of Dread is slain and dead,
And ever so our foes shall fall!


This song appeared to please Thorin, and
he smiled again and grew merry; and he began
reckoning the distance to the Iron Hills and how
long it would be before Dain could reach the
Lonely Mountain, if he had set out as soon as
the message reached him. But Bilbo’s heart
fell, both at the song and the talk: they sounded
much too warlike.

The next morning early a company of
spearmen was seen crossing the river, and
marching up the valley. They bore with them the
green banner of the Elvenking and the blue
banner of the Lake, and they advanced until
they stood right before the wall at the Gate.

Again Thorin hailed them in a loud voice:
“Who are you that come armed for war to the
gates of Thorin son of Thrain, King under the
Mountain?” This time he was answered.

A tall man stood forward, dark of hair and
grim of face, and he cried: “Hail Thorin! Why do
you fence yourself like a robber in his hold? We
are not yet foes, and we rejoice that you are
alive beyond our hope. We came expecting to



find none living here; yet now that we are met
there is matter for a parley and a council.”

“Who are you, and of what would you
parley?”

“I am Bard, and by my hand was the dragon
slain and your treasure delivered. Is that not a
matter that concerns you? Moreover I am by
right descent the heir of Girion of Dale, and in
your hoard is mingled much of the wealth of his
halls and towns, which of old Smaug stole. Is
not that a matter of which we may speak?
Further in his last battle Smaug destroyed the
dwellings of the men of Esgaroth, and I am yet
the servant of their Master. I would speak for
him and ask whether you have no thought for
the sorrow and misery of his people. They
aided you in your distress, and in recompense
you have thus far brought ruin only, though
doubtless undesigned.”

Now these were fair words and true, if
proudly and grimly spoken; and Bilbo thought
that Thorin would at once admit what justice
was in them. He did not, of course, expect that
any one would remember that it was he who
discovered all by himself the dragon’s weak
spot; and that was just as well, for no one ever
did. But also he did not reckon with the power
that gold has upon which a dragon has long
brooded, nor with dwarvish hearts. Long hours


in the past days Thorin had spent in the
treasury, and the lust of it was heavy on him.
Though he had hunted chiefly for the
Arkenstone, yet he had an eye for many another
wonderful thing that was lying there, about which
were wound old memories of the labours and
the sorrows of his race.

“You put your worst cause last and in the
chief place,” Thorin answered. “To the treasure
of my people no man has a claim, because
Smaug who stole it from us also robbed him of
life or home. The treasure was not his that his
evil deeds should be amended with a share of
it. The price of the goods and the assistance
that we received of the Lake-men we will fairly
pay — in due time. But nothing will we give, not
even a loafs worth, under threat offeree. While
an armed host lies before our doors, we look on
you as foes and thieves.

“It is in my mind to ask what share of their
inheritance you would have paid to our kindred,
had you found the hoard unguarded and us
slain.”

“A just question,” replied Bard. “But you are
not dead, and we are not robbers. Moreover the
wealthy may have pity beyond right on the
needy that befriended them when they were in
want. And still my other claims remain


unanswered.”

“I will not parley, as I have said, with armed
men at my gate. Nor at all with the people of the
Elvenking, whom I remember with small
kindness. In this debate they have no place.
Begone now ere our arrows fly! And if you
would speak with me again, first dismiss the
elvish host to the woods where it belongs, and
then return, laying down your arms before you
approach the threshold.”

“The Elvenking is my friend, and he has
succoured the people of the Lake in their need,
though they had no claim but friendship on him,”
answered Bard. “We will give you time to repent
your words. Gather your wisdom ere we return!”
Then he departed and went back to the camp.

Ere many hours were past, the banner-
bearers returned, and trumpeters stood forth
and blew a blast:

“In the name of Esgaroth and the Forest,”
one cried, “we speak unto Thorin Thrain’s son
Oakenshield, calling himself the King under the
Mountain, and we bid him consider well the
claims that have been urged, or be declared
our foe. At the least he shall deliver one twelfth
portion of the treasure unto Bard, as the
dragon-slayer, and as the heir of Girion. From
that portion Bard will himself contribute to the
aid of Esgaroth; but if Thorin would have the



friendship and honour of the lands about, as his
sires had of old, then he will give also
somewhat of his own for the comfort of the men
of the Lake.”

Then Thorin seized a bow of horn and shot
an arrow at the speaker. It smote into his shield
and stuck there quivering.

“Since such is your answer,” he called in
return, “I declare the Mountain besieged. You
shall not depart from it, until you call on your
side for a truce and a parley. We will bear no
weapons against you, but we leave you to your
gold. You may eat that, if you will!”

With that the messengers departed swiftly,
and the dwarves were left to consider their
case. So grim had Thorin become, that even if
they had wished, the others would not have
dared to find fault with him; but indeed most of
them seemed to share his mind — except
perhaps old fat Bomburand Fili and Kili. Bilbo,
of course, disapproved of the whole turn of
affairs. He had by now had more than enough of
the Mountain, and being besieged inside it was
not at all to his taste.

“The whole place still stinks of dragon,” he
grumbled to himself, “and it makes me sick.
And cram is beginning simply to stick in my
throat.”





Chapter XVI


A THIEF IN THE NIGHT


Now the days passed slowly and wearily. Many
of the dwarves spent their time piling and
ordering the treasure; and now Thorin spoke of
the Arkenstone of Thrain, and bade them
eagerly to look for it in every corner.

“For the Arkenstone of my father,” he said,
“is worth more than a river of gold in itself, and
to me it is beyond price. That stone of all the
treasure I name unto myself, and I will be
avenged on anyone who finds it and withholds
it.”

Bilbo heard these words and he grew
afraid, wondering what would happen, if the
stone was found — wrapped in an old bundle of
tattered oddments that he used as a pillow. All
the same he did not speak of it, for as the
weariness of the days grew heavier, the
beginnings of a plan had come into his little
head.


Things had gone on like this for some time,
when the ravens brought news that Dain and
more than five hundred dwarves, hurrying from
the Iron Hills, were now within about two days’
march of Dale, coming from the North-East.

“But they cannot reach the Mountain
unmarked,” said Roac, “and I fear lest there be
battle in the valley. I do not call this counsel
good. Though they are a grim folk, they are not
likely to overcome the host that besets you; and
even if they did so, what will you gain? Winter
and snow is hastening behind them. How shall
you be fed without the friendship and goodwill
of the lands about you? The treasure is likely to
be your death, though the dragon is no more!”

But Thorin was not moved. “Winter and
snow will bite both men and elves,” he said,
“and they may find their dwelling in the waste
grievous to bear. With my friends behind them
and winter upon them, they will perhaps be in
softer mood to parley with.”

That night Bilbo made up his mind. The sky
was black and moonless. As soon as it was full
dark, he went to a corner of an inner chamber
just within the gate and drew from his bundle a
rope, and also the Arkenstone wrapped in a
rag. Then he climbed to the top of the wall. Only
Bombur was there, for it was his turn to watch,
and the dwarves kept only one watchman at a



time.

“It is mighty cold!” said Bombur. “I wish we
could have a fire up here as they have in the
camp!”

“It is warm enough inside,” said Bilbo.

“I daresay; but I am bound here till
midnight,” grumbled the fat dwarf. “A sorry
business altogether. Not that I venture to
disagree with Thorin, may his beard grow ever
longer; yet he was ever a dwarf with a stiff
neck.”

"Not as stiff as my legs,” said Bilbo. “I am
tired of stairs and stone passages. I would give
a good deal for the feel of grass at my toes.”

“I would give a good deal for the feel of a
strong drink in my throat, and for a soft bed after
a good supper!”

“I can’t give you those, while the siege is
going on. But it is long since I watched, and I will
take your turn for you, if you like. There is no
sleep in me tonight.”

“You are a good fellow, Mr. Baggins, and I
will take your offer kindly. If there should be
anything to note, rouse me first, mind you! I will
lie in the inner chamber to the left, not far away.”

“Off you go!” said Bilbo. “I will wake you at
midnight, and you can wake the next
watchman.”

As soon as Bombur had gone, Bilbo put on



his ring, fastened his rope, slipped down over
the wall, and was gone. He had about five hours
before him. Bombur would sleep (he could
sleep at any time, and ever since the adventure
in the forest he was always trying to recapture
the beautiful dreams he had then); and all the
others were busy with Thorin. It was unlikely that
any, even Fili or Kili, would come out on the wall
until it was their turn.

It was very dark, and the road after a while,
when he left the newly made path and climbed
down towards the lower course of the stream,
was strange to him. At last he came to the bend
where he had to cross the water, if he was to
make for the camp, as he wished. The bed of
the stream was there shallow but already broad,
and fording it in the dark was not easy for the
little hobbit. He was nearly across when he
missed his footing on a round stone and fell into
the cold water with a splash. He had barely
scrambled out on the far bank, shivering and
spluttering, when up came elves in the gloom
with bright lanterns and searched for the cause
of the noise.

“That was no fish!” one said. “There is a spy
about. Hide your lights! They will help him more
than us, if it is that queer little creature that is
said to be their servant.”

“Servant, indeed!” snorted Bilbo; and in the



middle of his snort he sneezed loudly, and the
elves immediately gathered towards the sound.

“Let’s have a light!” he said. “I am here, if
you want me!” and he slipped off his ring, and
popped from behind a rock.

They seized him quickly, in spite of their
surprise. “Who are you? Are you the dwarves’
hobbit? What are you doing? How did you get
so far past our sentinels?” they asked one after
another.

“I am Mr. Bilbo Baggins,” he answered,
“companion of Thorin, if you want to know. I
know your king well by sight, though perhaps he
doesn’t know me to look at. But Bard will
remember me, and it is Bard I particularly want
to see.”

“Indeed!” said they, “and what may be your
business?”

“Whatever it is, it’s my own, my good elves.
But if you wish ever to get back to your own
woods from this cold cheerless place,” he
answered shivering, “you will take me along
quick to a fire, where I can dry — and then you
will let me speak to your chiefs as quick as may
be. I have only an hour or two to spare.”


That is how it came about that some two hours



after his escape from the Gate, Bilbo was
sitting beside a warm fire in front of a large tent,
and there sat too, gazing curiously at him, both
the Elvenking and Bard. A hobbit in elvish
armour, partly wrapped in an old blanket, was
something new to them.

“Really you know,” Bilbo was saying in his
best business manner, “things are impossible.
Personally I am tired of the whole affair. I wish I
was back in the West in my own home, where
folk are more reasonable. But I have an interest
in this matter — one fourteenth share, to be
precise, according to a letter, which fortunately I
believe I have kept.” He drew from a pocket in
his old jacket (which he still wore over his mail),
crumpled and much folded, Thorin’s letter that
had been put under the clock on his
mantelpiece in May!

“A share in the profits, mind you,” he went
on. “I am aware of that. Personally I am only too
ready to consider all your claims carefully, and
deduct what is right from the total before putting
in my own claim. However you don’t know
Thorin Oakenshield as well as I do now. I
assure you, he is quite ready to sit on a heap of
gold and starve, as long as you sit here.”

“Well, let him!” said Bard. “Such a fool
deserves to starve.”

“Quite so,” said Bilbo. “I see your point of



view. At the same time winter is coming on fast.
Before long you will be having snow and what
not, and supplies will be difficult — even for elves
I imagine. Also there will be other difficulties.
You have not heard of Dain and the dwarves of
the Iron Hills?”

“We have, a long time ago; but what has he
got to do with us?” asked the king.

“I thought as much. I see I have some
information you have not got. Dain, I may tell
you, is now less than two days’ march off, and
has at least five hundred grim dwarves with him
— a good many of them have had experience in
the dreadful dwarf and goblin wars, of which you
have no doubt heard. When they arrive there
may be serious trouble.”

“Why do you tell us this? Are you betraying
your friends, or are you threatening us?” asked
Bard grimly.

“My dear Bard!” squeaked Bilbo. “Don’t be
so hasty! I never met such suspicious folk! I am
merely trying to avoid trouble for all concerned.
Now I will make you an offer! !”

“Let us hear it!” they said.

“You may see it!” said he. “It is this!” and he
drew forth the Arkenstone, and threw away the
wrapping.

The Elvenking himself, whose eyes were
used to things of wonder and beauty, stood up



in amazement. Even Bard gazed marvelling at it
in silence. It was as if a globe had been filled
with moonlight and hung before them in a net
woven of the glint of frosty stars.

“This is the Arkenstone of Thrain,” said
Bilbo, “the Heart of the Mountain; and it is also
the heart of Thorin. He values it above a river of
gold. I give it to you. It will aid you in your
bargaining.” Then Bilbo, not without a shudder,
not without a glance of longing, handed the
marvellous stone to Bard, and he held it in his
hand, as though dazed.

“But how is it yours to give?” he asked at
last with an effort.

“O well!” said the hobbit uncomfortably. “It
isn’t exactly; but, well, I am willing to let it stand
against all my claim, don’t you know. I may be a
burglar — or so they say: personally I never really
felt like one — but I am an honest one, I hope,
more or less. Anyway I am going back now, and
the dwarves can do what they like to me. I hope
you will find it useful.”

The Elvenking looked at Bilbo with a new
wonder. “Bilbo Baggins!” he said. “You are
more worthy to wear the armour of elf-princes
than many that have looked more comely in it.
But I wonder if Thorin Oakenshield will see it so.
I have more knowledge of dwarves in general
than you have perhaps. I advise you to remain



with us, and here you shall be honoured and
thrice welcome.”

“Thank you very much I am sure,” said Bilbo
with a bow. “But I don’t think I ought to leave my
friends like this, after all we have gone through
together. And I promised to wake old Bombur
at midnight, too! Really I must be going, and
quickly.”

Nothing they could say would stop him; so
an escort was provided for him, and as he went
both the king and Bard saluted him with honour.
As they passed through the camp an old man,
wrapped in a dark cloak, rose from a tent door
where he was sitting and came towards them.

“Well done! Mr. Baggins!” he said, clapping
Bilbo on the back. “There is always more about
you than anyone expects!” It was Gandalf.

For the first time for many a day Bilbo was
really delighted. But there was no time for all the
questions that he immediately wished to ask.

“All in good time!” said Gandalf. “Things are
drawing towards the end now, unless I am
mistaken. There is an unpleasant time just in
front of you; but keep your heart up! You may
come through all right. There is news brewing
that even the ravens have not heard. Good
night!”

Puzzled but cheered, Bilbo hurried on. He
was guided to a safe ford and set across dry,



and then he said farewell to the elves and
climbed carefully back towards the Gate. Great
weariness began to come over him; but it was
well before midnight when he clambered up the
rope again — it was still where he had left it. He
untied it and hid it, and then he sat down on the
wall and wondered anxiously what would
happen next.

At midnight he woke up Bombur; and then
in turn rolled himself up in his corner, without
listening to the old dwarfs thanks (which he felt
he had hardly earned). He was soon fast asleep
forgetting all his worries till the morning. As a
matter of fact he was dreaming of eggs and
bacon.




Chapter XVII


THE CLOUDS BURST


Next day the trumpets rang early in the camp.
Soon a single runner was seen hurrying along
the narrow path. At a distance he stood and
hailed them, asking whether Thorin would now
listen to another embassy, since new tidings
had come to hand, and matters were changed.

“That will be Dain!” said Thorin when he
heard. “They will have got wind of his coming. I
thought that would alter their mood! Bid them
come few in number and weaponless, and I will
hear,” he called to the messenger.

About midday the banners of the Forest
and the Lake were seen to be borne forth
again. A company of twenty was approaching.
At the beginning of the narrow way they laid
aside sword and spear, and came on towards
the Gate. Wondering, the dwarves saw that
among them were both Bard and the Elvenking,
before whom an old man wrapped in cloak and


hood bore a strong casket of iron-bound wood.

“Hail Thorin!” said Bard. “Are you still of the
same mind?”

“My mind does not change with the rising
and setting of a few suns,” answered Thorin.
“Did you come to ask me idle questions? Still
the elf-host has not departed as I bade! Till then
you come in vain to bargain with me.”

“Is there then nothing for which you would
yield any of your gold?”

"Nothing that you or your friends have to
offer.”

“What of the Arkenstone of Thrain?” said
he, and at the same moment the old man
opened the casket and held aloft the jewel. The
light leapt from his hand, bright and white in the
morning.

Then Thorin was stricken dumb with
amazement and confusion. No one spoke for a
long while.

Thorin at length broke the silence, and his
voice was thick with wrath. “That stone was my
father’s, and is mine,” he said. “Why should I
purchase my own?” But wonder overcame him
and he added: “But how came you by the
heirloom of my house — if there is need to ask
such a question of thieves?”

“We are not thieves,” Bard answered. “Your
own we will give back in return for our own.”



“How came you by it?” shouted Thorin in
gathering rage.

“I gave it to them!” squeaked Bilbo, who
was peering over the wall, by now in a dreadful
fright.

“You! You!” cried Thorin, turning upon him
and grasping him with both hands. “You
miserable hobbit! You undersized — burglar!” he
shouted at a loss for words, and he shook poor
Bilbo like a rabbit.

“By the beard of Durin! I wish I had Gandalf
here! Curse him for his choice of you! May his
beard wither! As for you I will throw you to the
rocks!” he cried and lifted Bilbo in his arms.

“Stay! Your wish is granted!” said a voice.
The old man with the casket threw aside his
hood and cloak. “Here is Gandalf! And none too
soon it seems. If you don’t like my Burglar,
please don’t damage him. Put him down, and
listen first to what he has to say!”

“You all seem in league!” said Thorin
dropping Bilbo on the top of the wall. “Never
again will I have dealings with any wizard or his
friends. What have you to say, you descendant
of rats?”

“Dear me! Dear me!” said Bilbo. “I am sure
this is all very uncomfortable. You may
remember saying that I might choose my own
fourteenth share? Perhaps I took it too literally



— I have been told that dwarves are sometimes
politer in word than in deed. The time was, all
the same, when you seemed to think that I had
been of some service. Descendant of rats,
indeed! Is this all the service of you and your
family that I was promised, Thorin? Take it that I
have disposed of my share as I wished, and let
it go at that!”

“I will,” said Thorin grimly. “And I will let you
go at that — and may we never meet again!”
Then he turned and spoke over the wall. “I am
betrayed,” he said. “It was rightly guessed that I
could not forbear to redeem the Arkenstone, the
treasure of my house. For it I will give one
fourteenth share of the hoard in silver and gold,
setting aside the gems; but that shall be
accounted the promised share of this traitor,
and with that reward he shall depart, and you
can divide it as you will. He will get little enough,
I doubt not. Take him, if you wish him to live;
and no friendship of mine goes with him.

“Get down now to your friends!” he said to
Bilbo, “or I will throw you down.”

“What about the gold and silver?” asked
Bilbo.

“That shall follow after, as can be arranged,”
said he. “Get down!”

“Until then we keep the stone,” cried Bard.

“You are not making a very splendid figure



as King under the Mountain,” said Gandalf. “But
things may change yet.”

“They may indeed,” said Thorin. And
already, so strong was the bewilderment of the
treasure upon him, he was pondering whether
by the help of Dain he might not recapture the
Arkenstone and withhold the share of the
reward.

And so Bilbo was swung down from the
wall, and departed with nothing for all his
trouble, except the armour which Thorin had
given him already. More than one of the
dwarves in their hearts felt shame and pity at
his going.

“Farewell!” he cried to them. “We may meet
again as friends.”

“Be off!” called Thorin. “You have mail upon
you, which was made by my folk, and is too
good for you. It cannot be pierced by arrows;
but if you do not hasten, I will sting your
miserable feet. So be swift!”

"Not so hasty!” said Bard. “We will give you
until tomorrow. At noon we will return, and see if
you have brought from the hoard the portion that
is to be set against the stone. If that is done
without deceit, then we will depart, and the elf-
host will go back to the Forest. In the meanwhile
farewell!”

With that they went back to the camp; but



Thorin sent messengers by Roac telling Dain of
what had passed, and bidding him come with
wary speed.


That day passed and the night. The next day the
wind shifted west, and the air was dark and
gloomy. The morning was still early when a cry
was heard in the camp. Runners came in to
report that a host of dwarves had appeared
round the eastern spur of the Mountain and was
now hastening to Dale. Dain had come. He had
hurried on through the night, and so had come
upon them sooner than they had expected.
Each one of his folk was clad in a hauberk of
steel mail that hung to his knees, and his legs
were covered with hose of a fine and flexible
metal mesh, the secret of whose making was
possessed by Dain’s people. The dwarves are
exceedingly strong for their height, but most of
these were strong even for dwarves. In battle
they wielded heavy two-handed mattocks; but
each of them had also a short broad sword at
his side and a roundshield slung at his back.
Their beards were forked and plaited and thrust
into their belts. Their caps were of iron and they
were shod with iron, and their faces were grim.

Trumpets called men and elves to arms.