would do with his share of the treasure (when
they got it, which at the moment did not seem
so impossible); and so they dropped off to
sleep one by one. And that was the last time
that they used the ponies, packages,
baggages, tools and paraphernalia that they
had brought with them.

It turned out a good thing that night that they
had brought little Bilbo with them, after all. For,
somehow, he could not go to sleep for a long
while; and when he did sleep, he had very nasty
dreams. He dreamed that a crack in the wall at
the back of the cave got bigger and bigger, and
opened wider and wider, and he was very
afraid but could not call out or do anything but
lie and look. Then he dreamed that the floor of
the cave was giving way, and he was slipping —
beginning to fall down, down, goodness knows
where to.

At that he woke up with a horrible start, and
found that part of his dream was true. A crack
had opened at the back of the cave, and was
already a wide passage. He was just in time to
see the last of the ponies’ tails disappearing
into it. Of course he gave a very loud yell, as
loud a yell as a hobbit can give, which is
surprising for their size.



Out jumped the goblins, big goblins, great
ugly-looking goblins, lots of goblins, before you
could say rocks and blocks. There were six to
each dwarf, at least, and two even for Bilbo;
and they were all grabbed and carried through
the crack, before you could say tinder and flint.
But not Gandalf. Bilbo’s yell had done that much
good. It had wakened him up wide in a
splintered second, and when goblins came to
grab him, there was a terrific flash like lightning
in the cave, a smell like gunpowder, and several
of them fell dead.

The crack closed with a snap, and Bilbo
and the dwarves were on the wrong side of it!
Where was Gandalf? Of that neither they nor the
goblins had any idea, and the goblins did not
wait to find out. They seized Bilbo and the
dwarves and hurried them along. It was deep,
deep, dark, such as only goblins that have
taken to living in the heart of the mountains can
see through. The passages there were crossed
and tangled in all directions, but the goblins
knew their way, as well as you do to the nearest
post-office; and the way went down and down,
and it was most horribly stuffy. The goblins were
very rough, and pinched unmercifully, and
chuckled and laughed in their horrible stony
voices; and Bilbo was more unhappy even than
when the troll had picked him up by his toes. He
wished again and again for his nice bright
hobbit-hole. Not for the last time.

Now there came a glimmer of a red light



before them. The goblins began to sing, or
croak, keeping time with the flap of their flat feet
on the stone, and shaking their prisoners as
well.


Clap! Snap! the black crack!
Grip, grab! Pinch, nab!

And down down to Goblin-town
You go, my lad!


Clash, crash! Crush, smash!

Hammer and tongs! Knocker and gongs!
Pound, pound, far underground!

Ho, ho! my lad!


Swish, smack! Whip crack!

Batter and beat! Yammer and bleat!
Work, work! Nor dare to shirk,

While Goblins quaff, and Goblins laugh,
Round and round far underground
Below, my lad!


It sounded truly terrifying. The walls echoed
to the clap, snap! and the crush, smash\ and to
the ugly laughter of their ho, ho! my lad! The



general meaning of the song was only too plain;
for now the goblins took out whips and whipped
them with a s\nish, smack!, and set them
running as fast as they could in front of them;
and more than one of the dwarves were already
yammering and bleating like anything, when
they stumbled into a big cavern.

It was lit by a great red fire in the middle,
and by torches along the walls, and it was full of
goblins. They all laughed and stamped and
clapped their hands, when the dwarves (with
poor little Bilbo at the back and nearest to the
whips) came running in, while the goblin-drivers
whooped and cracked their whips behind. The
ponies were already there huddled in a corner;
and there were all the baggages and packages
lying broken open, and being rummaged by
goblins, and smelt by goblins, and fingered by
goblins, and quarrelled over by goblins.

I am afraid that was the last they ever saw
of those excellent little ponies, including a jolly
sturdy little white fellow that Elrond had lent to
Gandalf, since his horse was not suitable for the
mountain-paths. For goblins eat horses and
ponies and donkeys (and other much more
dreadful things), and they are always hungry.
Just now however the prisoners were thinking
only of themselves. The goblins chained their
hands behind their backs and linked them all
together in a line, and dragged them to the far
end of the cavern with little Bilbo tugging at the
end of the row.



There in the shadows on a large flat stone
sat a tremendous goblin with a huge head, and
armed goblins were standing round him
carrying the axes and the bent swords that they
use. Now goblins are cruel, wicked, and bad-
hearted. They make no beautiful things, but they
make many clever ones. They can tunnel and
mine as well as any but the most skilled
dwarves, when they take the trouble, though
they are usually untidy and dirty. Hammers,
axes, swords, daggers, pickaxes, tongs, and
also instruments of torture, they make very well,
or get other people to make to their design,
prisoners and slaves that have to work till they
die for want of air and light. It is not unlikely that
they invented some of the machines that have
since troubled the world, especially the
ingenious devices for killing large numbers of
people at once, for wheels and engines and
explosions always delighted them, and also not
working with their own hands more than they
could help; but in those days and those wild
parts they had not advanced (as it is called) so
far. They did not hate dwarves especially, no
more than they hated everybody and everything,
and particularly the orderly and prosperous; in
some parts wicked dwarves had even made
alliances with them. But they had a special
grudge against Thorin’s people, because of the
war which you have heard mentioned, but which
does not come into this tale; and anyway
goblins don't care who they catch, as long as it



is done smart and secret, and the prisoners are
not able to defend themselves.

“Who are these miserable persons?” said
the Great Goblin.

“Dwarves, and this!” said one of the drivers,
pulling at Bilbo’s chain so that he fell forward
onto his knees. “We found them sheltering in
our Front Porch.”

“What do you mean by it?” said the Great
Goblin turning to Thorin. “Up to no good, I'll
warrant! Spying on the private business of my
people, I guess! Thieves, I shouldn’t be
surprised to learn! Murderers and friends of
Elves, not unlikely! Come! What have you got to
say?”

“Thorin the dwarf at your service!” he
replied — it was merely a polite nothing. “Of the
things which you suspect and imagine we had
no idea at all. We sheltered from a storm in
what seemed a convenient cave and unused;
nothing was further from our thoughts than
inconveniencing goblins in any way whatever.”
That was true enough!

“Urn!” said the Great Goblin. “So you say!
Might I ask what you were doing up in the
mountains at all, and where you were coming
from, and where you were going to? In fact I
should like to know all about you. Not that it will
do you much good, Thorin Oakenshield, I know
too much about your folk already; but let’s have
the truth, or I will prepare something particularly
uncomfortable for you!”



“We were on a journey to visit our relatives,
our nephews and nieces, and first, second, and
third cousins, and the other descendants of our
grandfathers, who live on the East side of these
truly hospitable mountains,” said Thorin, not
quite knowing what to say all at once in a
moment, when obviously the exact truth would
not do at all.

“He is a liar, O truly tremendous one!” said
one of the drivers. “Several of our people were
struck by lightning in the cave, when we invited
these creatures to come below; and they are as
dead as stones. Also he has not explained
this!” He held out the sword which Thorin had
worn, the sword which came from the Trolls' lair.

The Great Goblin gave a truly awful howl of
rage when he looked at it, and all his soldiers
gnashed their teeth, clashed their shields, and
stamped. They knew the sword at once. It had
killed hundreds of goblins in its time, when the
fair elves of Gondolin hunted them in the hills or
did battle before their walls. They had called it
Orcrist, Goblin-cleaver, but the goblins called it
simply Biter. They hated it and hated worse any
one that carried it.

“Murderers and elf-friends!” the Great
Goblin shouted. “Slash them! Beat them! Bite
them! Gnash them! Take them away to dark
holes full of snakes, and never let them see the
light again!” He was in such a rage that he
jumped off his seat and himself rushed at Thorin
with his mouth open.



Just at that moment all the lights in the
cavern went out, and the great fire went off
poof! into a tower of blue glowing smoke, right
up to the roof, that scattered piercing white
sparks all among the goblins.

The yells and yammering, croaking,
jibbering and jabbering; howls, growls and
curses; shrieking and skriking, that followed
were beyond description. Several hundred wild
cats and wolves being roasted slowly alive
together would not have compared with it. The
sparks were burning holes in the goblins, and
the smoke that now fell from the roof made the
air too thick for even their eyes to see through.
Soon they were falling over one another and
rolling in heaps on the floor, biting and kicking
and fighting as if they had all gone mad.

Suddenly a sword flashed in its own light.
Bilbo saw it go right through the Great Goblin
as he stood dumbfounded in the middle of his
rage. He fell dead, and the goblin soldiers fled
before the sword shrieking into the darkness.

The sword went back into its sheath.
“Follow me quick!” said a voice fierce and
quiet; and before Bilbo understood what had
happened he was trotting along again, as fast
as he could trot, at the end of the line, down
more dark passages with the yells of the goblin-
hall growing fainter behind him. A pale light was
leading them on.

“Quicker, quicker!” said the voice. “The
torches will soon be relit.”



“Half a minute!” said Dori, who was at the
back next to Bilbo, and a decent fellow. He
made the hobbit scramble on his shoulders as
best he could with his tied hands, and then off
they all went at a run, with a clink-clink of chains,
and many a stumble, since they had no hands
to steady themselves with. Not for a long while
did they stop, and by that time they must have
been right down in the very mountain’s heart.

Then Gandalf lit up his wand. Of course it
was Gandalf; but just then they were too busy to
ask how he got there. He took out his sword
again, and again it flashed in the dark by itself.
It burned with a rage that made it gleam if
goblins were about; now it was bright as blue
flame for delight in the killing of the great lord of
the cave. It made no trouble whatever of cutting
through the goblin-chains and setting all the
prisoners free as quickly as possible. This
sword’s name was Glamdring the Foe-hammer,
if you remember. The goblins just called it
Beater, and hated it worse than Biter if
possible. Orcrist, too, had been saved; for
Gandalf had brought it along as well, snatching
it from one of the terrified guards. Gandalf
thought of most things; and though he could not
do everything, he could do a great deal for
friends in a tight corner.

“Are we all here?” said he, handing his
sword back to Thorin with a bow. “Let me see:
one — that's Thorin; two, three, four, five, six,
seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven; where are Fili



and Kili? Here they are! twelve, thirteen — and
here’s Mr. Baggins: fourteen! Well, well! it might
be worse, and then again it might be a good
deal better. No ponies, and no food, and no
knowing quite where we are, and hordes of
angry goblins just behind! On we go!”

On they went. Gandalf was quite right: they
began to hear goblin noises and horrible cries
far behind in the passages they had come
through. That sent them on faster than ever, and
as poor Bilbo could not possibly go half as fast
— for dwarves can roll along at a tremendous
pace, I can tell you, when they have to — they
took it in turn to carry him on their backs.

Still goblins go faster than dwarves, and
these goblins knew the way better (they had
made the paths themselves), and were madly
angry; so that do what they could the dwarves
heard the cries and howls getting closer and
closer. Soon they could hear even the flap of the
goblin feet, many many feet which seemed only
just round the last corner. The blink of red
torches could be seen behind them in the tunnel
they were following; and they were getting
deadly tired.

“Why, O why did I ever leave my hobbit-
hole!” said poor Mr. Baggins bumping up and
down on Bombur’s back.

“Why, O why did I ever bring a wretched
little hobbit on a treasure hunt!” said poor
Bombur, who was fat, and staggered along with
the sweat dripping down his nose in his heat



and terror.

At this point Gandalf fell behind, and Thorin
with him. They turned a sharp corner. “About
turn!” he shouted. “Draw your sword Thorin!”

There was nothing else to be done; and the
goblins did not like it. They came scurrying
round the corner in full cry, and found Goblin-
cleaver, and Foe-hammer shining cold and
bright right in their astonished eyes. The ones in
front dropped their torches and gave one yell
before they were killed. The ones behind yelled
still more, and leaped back knocking over those
that were running after them. “Biter and Beater!”
they shrieked; and soon they were all in
confusion, and most of them were hustling back
the way they had come.

It was quite a long while before any of them
dared to turn that corner. By that time the
dwarves had gone on again, a long, long, way
on into the dark tunnels of the goblins’ realm.
When the goblins discovered that, they put out
their torches and they slipped on soft shoes,
and they chose out their very quickest runners
with the sharpest ears and eyes. These ran
forward, as swift as weasels in the dark, and
with hardly any more noise than bats.

That is why neither Bilbo, nor the dwarves,
nor even Gandalf heard them coming. Nor did
they see them. But they were seen by the
goblins that ran silently up behind, for Gandalf
was letting his wand give out a faint light to help
the dwarves as they went along.



Quite suddenly Dori, now at the back again
carrying Bilbo, was grabbed from behind in the
dark. He shouted and fell; and the hobbit rolled
off his shoulders into the blackness, bumped
his head on hard rock, and remembered
nothing more.




Chapter V


RIDDLES IN THE DARK


When Bilbo opened his eyes, he wondered if
he had; for it was just as dark as with them shut.
No one was anywhere near him. Just imagine
his fright! He could hear nothing, see nothing,
and he could feel nothing except the stone of
the floor.

Very slowly he got up and groped about on
all fours, till he touched the wall of the tunnel; but
neither up nor down it could he find anything:
nothing at all, no sign of goblins, no sign of
dwarves. His head was swimming, and he was
far from certain even of the direction they had
been going in when he had his fall. He guessed
as well as he could, and crawled along for a
good way, till suddenly his hand met what felt
like a tiny ring of cold metal lying on the floor of
the tunnel. It was a turning point in his career,
but he did not know it. He put the ring in his
pocket almost without thinking; certainly it did


not seem of any particular use at the moment.
He did not go much further, but sat down on the
cold floor and gave himself up to complete
miserableness, for a long while. He thought of
himself frying bacon and eggs in his own
kitchen at home — for he could feel inside that it
was high time for some meal or other; but that
only made him miserabler.

He could not think what to do; nor could he
think what had happened; or why he had been
left behind; or why, if he had been left behind,
the goblins had not caught him; or even why his
head was so sore. The truth was he had been
lying quiet, out of sight and out of mind, in a very
dark corner for a long while.

After some time he felt for his pipe. It was
not broken, and that was something. Then he
felt for his pouch, and there was some tobacco
in it, and that was something more. Then he felt
for matches and he could not find any at all, and
that shattered his hopes completely. Just as
well for him, as he agreed when he came to his
senses. Goodness knows what the striking of
matches and the smell of tobacco would have
brought on him out of dark holes in that horrible
place. Still at the moment he felt very crushed.
But in slapping all his pockets and feeling all
round himself for matches his hand came on the
hilt of his little sword — the little dagger that he



got from the trolls, and that he had quite
forgotten; nor fortunately had the goblins
noticed it, as he wore it inside his breeches.

Now he drew it out. It shone pale and dim
before his eyes. “So it is an elvish blade, too,”
he thought; “and goblins are not very near, and
yet not far enough.”

But somehow he was comforted. It was
rather splendid to be wearing a blade made in
Gondolin for the goblin-wars of which so many
songs had sung; and also he had noticed that
such weapons made a great impression on
goblins that came upon them suddenly.

“Go back?” he thought. “No good at all! Go
sideways? Impossible! Go forward? Only thing
to do! On we go!” So up he got, and trotted
along with his little sword held in front of him
and one hand feeling the wall, and his heart all
of a patter and a pitter.


Now certainly Bilbo was in what is called a tight
place. But you must remember it was not quite
so tight for him as it would have been for me or
for you. Hobbits are not quite like ordinary
people; and after all if their holes are nice
cheery places and properly aired, quite different
from the tunnels of the goblins, still they are



more used to tunnelling than we are, and they
do not easily lose their sense of direction
underground — not when their heads have
recovered from being bumped. Also they can
move very quietly, and hide easily, and recover
wonderfully from falls and bruises, and they
have a fund of wisdom and wise sayings that
men have mostly never heard or have forgotten
long ago.

I should not have liked to have been in Mr.
Baggins’ place, all the same. The tunnel
seemed to have no end. All he knew was that it
was still going down pretty steadily and keeping
in the same direction in spite of a twist and a
turn or two. There were passages leading off to
the side every now and then, as he knew by the
glimmer of his sword, or could feel with his hand
on the wall. Of these he took no notice, except
to hurry past for fear of goblins or half-imagined
dark things coming out of them. On and on he
went, and down and down; and still he heard no
sound of anything except the occasional whirr of
a bat by his ears, which startled him at first, till it
became too frequent to bother about. I do not
know how long he kept on like this, hating to go
on, not daring to stop, on, on, until he was
tireder than tired. It seemed like all the way to
tomorrow and over it to the days beyond.

Suddenly without any warning he trotted



splash into water! Ugh! it was icy cold. That
pulled him up sharp and short. He did not know
whether it was just a pool in the path, or the
edge of an underground stream that crossed
the passage, or the brink of a deep dark
subterranean lake. The sword was hardly
shining at all. He stopped, and he could hear,
when he listened hard, drops drip-drip-dripping
from an unseen roof into the water below; but
there seemed no other sort of sound.

“So it is a pool or a lake, and not an
underground river,” he thought. Still he did not
dare to wade out into the darkness. He could
not swim; and he thought, too, of nasty slimy
things, with big bulging blind eyes, wriggling in
the water. There are strange things living in the
pools and lakes in the hearts of mountains: fish
whose fathers swam in, goodness only knows
how many years ago, and never swam out
again, while their eyes grew bigger and bigger
and bigger from trying to see in the blackness;
also there are other things more slimy than fish.
Even in the tunnels and caves the goblins have
made for themselves there are other things
living unbeknown to them that have sneaked in
from outside to lie up in the dark. Some of
these caves, too, go back in their beginnings to
ages before the goblins, who only widened
them and joined them up with passages, and



the original owners are still there in odd
corners, slinking and nosing about.

Deep down here by the dark water lived old
Gollum, a small slimy creature. I don’t know
where he came from, nor who or what he was.
He was Gollum — as dark as darkness, except
for two big round pale eyes in his thin face. He
had a little boat, and he rowed about quite
quietly on the lake; for lake it was, wide and
deep and deadly cold. He paddled it with large
feet dangling over the side, but never a ripple
did he make. Not he. He was looking out of his
pale lamp-like eyes for blind fish, which he
grabbed with his long fingers as quick as
thinking. He liked meat too. Goblin he thought
good, when he could get it; but he took care
they never found him out. He just throttled them
from behind, if they ever came down alone
anywhere near the edge of the water, while he
was prowling about. They very seldom did, for
they had a feeling that something unpleasant
was lurking down there, down at the very roots
of the mountain. They had come on the lake,
when they were tunnelling down long ago, and
they found they could go no further; so there
their road ended in that direction, and there was
no reason to go that way — unless the Great
Goblin sent them. Sometimes he took a fancy
for fish from the lake, and sometimes neither



goblin nor fish came back.

Actually Gollum lived on a slimy island of
rock in the middle of the lake. He was watching
Bilbo now from the distance with his pale eyes
like telescopes. Bilbo could not see him, but he
was wondering a lot about Bilbo, for he could
see that he was no goblin at all.

Gollum got into his boat and shot off from
the island, while Bilbo was sitting on the brink
altogether flummoxed and at the end of his way
and his wits. Suddenly up came Gollum and
whispered and hissed:

“Bless us and splash us, my precioussss! I
guess it’s a choice feast; at least a tasty morsel
it’d make us, gollum!”And when he said gollum
he made a horrible swallowing noise in his
throat. That is how he got his name, though he
always called himself ‘my precious’.

The hobbit jumped nearly out of his skin
when the hiss came in his ears, and he
suddenly saw the pale eyes sticking out at him.

“Who are you?” he said, thrusting his
dagger in front of him.

“What iss he, my preciouss?” whispered
Gollum (who always spoke to himself through
never having anyone else to speak to). This is
what he had come to find out, for he was not
really very hungry at the moment, only curious;
otherwise he would have grabbed first and



whispered afterwards.

“I am Mr. Bilbo Baggins. I have lost the
dwarves and I have lost the wizard, and I don’t
know where I am; and I don’t want to know, if
only I can get away.”

“What’s he got in his handses?” said
Gollum, looking at the sword, which he did not
quite like.

“A sword, a blade which came out of
Gondolin!”

“Sssss” said Gollum, and became quite
polite. “Praps ye sits here and chats with it a
bitsy, my preciousss. It likes riddles, praps it
does, does it?” He was anxious to appear
friendly, at any rate for the moment, and until he
found out more about the sword and the hobbit,
whether he was quite alone really, whether he
was good to eat, and whether Gollum was really
hungry. Riddles were all he could think of.
Asking them, and sometimes guessing them,
had been the only game he had ever played
with other funny creatures sitting in their holes in
the long, long ago, before he lost all his friends
and was driven away, alone, and crept down,
down, into the dark under the mountains.

“Very well,” said Bilbo, who was anxious to
agree, until he found out more about the
creature, whether he was quite alone, whether
he was fierce or hungry, and whether he was a



friend of the goblins.

“You ask first,” he said, because he had not
had time to think of a riddle.

So Gollum hissed:


What has roots as nobody sees,
Is taller than trees,

Up, up it goes,

And yet never grows?


“Easy!” said Bilbo. “Mountain, I suppose.”

“Does it guess easy? It must have a
competition with us, my preciouss! If precious
asks, and it doesn’t answer, we eats it, my
preciousss. If it asks us, and we doesn’t
answer, then we does what it wants, eh? We
shows it the way out, yes!”

“All right!” said Bilbo, not daring to
disagree, and nearly bursting his brain to think
of riddles that could save him from being eaten.


Thirty white horses on a red hill,
First they champ,

Then they stamp,

Then they stand still.



That was all he could think of to ask — the
idea of eating was rather on his mind. It was
rather an old one, too, and Gollum knew the
answer as well as you do.

“Chestnuts, chestnuts,” he hissed. “Teeth!
teeth! my preciousss; but we has only six!” Then
he asked his second:


Voiceless it cries,
Wingless flutters,
Toothless bites,
Mouthless mutters.


“Half a moment!” cried Bilbo, who was still
thinking uncomfortably about eating. Fortunately
he had once heard something rather like this
before, and getting his wits back he thought of
the answer. “Wind, wind of course,” he said,
and he was so pleased that he made up one on
the spot. “This’ll puzzle the nasty little
underground creature,” he thought:


An eye in a blue face
Sawan eye in a green face.
“That eye is like to this eye”
Said the first eye,



“Butin tow place
Notin high place.”


“Ss, ss, ss,” said Gollum. He had been
underground a long long time, and was
forgetting this sort of thing. But just as Bilbo was
beginning to hope that the wretch would not be
able to answer, Gollum brought up memories of
ages and ages and ages before, when he lived
with his grandmother in a hole in a bank by a
river, “Sss, sss, my preciouss,” he said. “Sun on
the daisies it means, it does.”

But these ordinary above ground everyday
sort of riddles were tiring for him. Also they
reminded him of days when he had been less
lonely and sneaky and nasty, and that put him
out of temper. What is more they made him
hungry; so this time he tried something a bit
more difficult and more unpleasant:


It cannot be seen, cannot be felt,
Cannot be heard, cannot be smelt.
It lies behind stars and Underhills,
And empty holes it fills.

It comes first and follows after,
Ends life, kills laughter.



Unfortunately for Gollum Bilbo had heard
that sort of thing before; and the answer was all
round him anyway. “Dark!” he said without even
scratching his head or putting on his thinking
cap.


A box without hinges, key, or lid,
Yet golden treasure inside is hid,


he asked to gain time, until he could think of a
really hard one. This he thought a dreadfully
easy chestnut, though he had not asked it in the
usual words. But it proved a nasty poser for
Gollum. He hissed to himself, and still he did not
answer; he whispered and spluttered.

After some while Bilbo became impatient.
“Well, what is it?” he said. “The answer’s not a
kettle boiling over, as you seem to think from
the noise you are making.”

“Give us a chance; let it give us a chance,
my preciouss — ss — ss.”

“Well,” said Bilbo after giving him a long
chance, “what about your guess?”

But suddenly Gollum remembered thieving
from nests long ago, and sitting under the river



bank teaching his grandmother, teaching his
grandmother to suck — “Eggses!” he hissed.
“Eggses it is!” Then he asked:


Alive without breath,

As cold as death;

Never thirsty, ever drinking,
All in mail never clinking.


He also in his turn thought this was a
dreadfully easy one, because he was always
thinking of the answer. But he could not
remember anything better at the moment, he
was so flustered by the egg-question. All the
same it was a poser for poor Bilbo, who never
had anything to do with the water if he could
help it. I imagine you know the answer, of
course, or can guess it as easy as winking,
since you are sitting comfortably at home and
have not the danger of being eaten to disturb
your thinking. Bilbo sat and cleared his throat
once or twice, but no answer came.

After a while Gollum began to hiss with
pleasure to himself: “Is it nice, my preciousss?
Is it juicy? Is it scrumptiously crunchable?” He
began to peer at Bilbo out of the darkness.

“Half a moment,” said the hobbit shivering.



“I gave you a good long chance just now.”

“It must make haste, haste!” said Gollum,
beginning to climb out of his boat on to the
shore to get at Bilbo. But when he put his long
webby foot in the water, a fish jumped out in a
fright and fell on Bilbo’s toes.

“Ugh!” he said, “it is cold and clammy!” —
and so he guessed. “Fish! fish!” he cried. “It is
fish!”

Gollum was dreadfully disappointed; but
Bilbo asked another riddle as quick as ever he
could, so that Gollum had to get back into his
boat and think.

No-legs lay on one-leg, two-legs sat near
on three-legs, four-legs got some.

It was not really the right time for this riddle,
but Bilbo was in a hurry. Gollum might have had
some trouble guessing it, if he had asked it at
another time. As it was, talking offish, “no-legs”
was not so very difficult, and after that the rest
was easy. “Fish on a little table, man at table
sitting on a stool, the cat has the bones” that of
course is the answer, and Gollum soon gave it.
Then he thought the time had come to ask
something hard and horrible. This is what he
said:


This thing all things devours:



Birds, beasts, trees, flowers;
Gnaws iron, bites steel;

Grinds hard stones to meal;
Slays king, ruins town,

And beats high mountain down.


Poor Bilbo sat in the dark thinking of all the
horrible names of all the giants and ogres he
had ever heard told of in tales, but not one of
them had done all these things. He had a
feeling that the answer was quite different and
that he ought to know it, but he could not think of
it. He began to get frightened, and that is bad
for thinking. Gollum began to get out of his boat.
He flapped into the water and paddled to the
bank; Bilbo could see his eyes coming towards
him. His tongue seemed to stick in his mouth;
he wanted to shout out: “Give me more time!
Give me time!” But all that came out with a
sudden squeal was:

“Time! Time!”


Bilbo was saved by pure luck. For that of
course was the answer.

Gollum was disappointed once more; and
now he was getting angry, and also tired of the
game. It had made him very hungry indeed. This



time he did not go back to the boat. He sat
down in the dark by Bilbo. That made the hobbit
most dreadfully uncomfortable and scattered
his wits.

“It’s got to ask uss a quesstion, my
preciouss, yes, yess, yesss. Jusst one more
question to guess, yes, yess,” said Gollum.

But Bilbo simply could not think of any
question with that nasty wet cold thing sitting
next to him, and pawing and poking him. He
scratched himself, he pinched himself; still he
could not think of anything.

“Ask us! ask us!” said Gollum.

Bilbo pinched himself and slapped himself;
he gripped on his little sword; he even felt in his
pocket with his other hand. There he found the
ring he had picked up in the passage and
forgotten about.

“What have I got in my pocket?” he said
aloud. He was talking to himself, but Gollum
thought it was a riddle, and he was frightfully
upset.

"Not fair! not fair!” he hissed. “It isn’t fair, my
precious, is it, to ask us what it’s got in its
nassty little pocketses?”

Bilbo seeing what had happened and
having nothing better to ask stuck to his
question, “What have I got in my pocket?” he
said louder.



“S-s-s-s-s,” hissed Gollum. “It must give us
three guesseses, my preciouss, three
guesseses.”

“Very well! Guess away!” said Bilbo.

“Handses!” said Gollum.

“Wrong,” said Bilbo, who had luckily just
taken his hand out again. “Guess again!”

“S-s-s-s-s,” said Gollum more upset than
ever. He thought of all the things he kept in his
own pockets: fish-bones, goblins’ teeth, wet
shells, a bit of bat-wing, a sharp stone to
sharpen his fangs on, and other nasty things.
He tried to think what other people kept in their
pockets.

“Knife!” he said at last.

“Wrong!” said Bilbo, who had lost his some
time ago. “Last guess!”

Now Gollum was in a much worse state
than when Bilbo had asked him the egg-
question. He hissed and spluttered and rocked
himself backwards and forwards, and slapped
his feet on the floor, and wriggled and
squirmed; but still he did not dare to waste his
last guess.

“Come on!” said Bilbo. “I am waiting!” He
tried to sound bold and cheerful, but he did not
feel at all sure how the game was going to end,
whether Gollum guessed right or not.

“Time’s up!” he said.



“String, or nothing!” shrieked Gollum, which
was not quite fair — working in two guesses at
once.

“Both wrong,” cried Bilbo very much
relieved; and he jumped at once to his feet, put
his back to the nearest wall, and held out his
little sword. He knew, of course, that the riddle-
game was sacred and of immense antiquity,
and even wicked creatures were afraid to cheat
when they played at it. But he felt he could not
trust this slimy thing to keep any promise at a
pinch. Any excuse would do for him to slide out
of it. And after all that last question had not
been a genuine riddle according to the ancient
laws.

But at any rate Gollum did not at once
attack him. He could see the sword in Bilbo’s
hand. He sat still, shivering and whispering. At
last Bilbo could wait no longer.

“Well?” he said. “What about your promise?
I want to go. You must show me the way.”

“Did we say so, precious? Show the nassty
little Baggins the way out, yes, yes. But what
has it got in its pocketses, eh? Not string,
precious, but not nothing. Oh no! gollum!”

"Never you mind,” said Bilbo. “A promise is
a promise.”

“Cross it is, impatient, precious,” hissed
Gollum. “But it must wait, yes it must. We can’t



go up the tunnels so hasty. We must go and get
some things first, yes, things to help us.”

“Well, hurry up!” said Bilbo, relieved to think
of Gollum going away. He thought he was just
making an excuse and did not mean to come
back. What was Gollum talking about? What
useful thing could he keep out on the dark lake?
But he was wrong. Gollum did mean to come
back. He was angry now and hungry. And he
was a miserable wicked creature, and already
he had a plan.

Not far away was his island, of which Bilbo
knew nothing, and there in his hiding-place he
kept a few wretched oddments, and one very
beautiful thing, very beautiful, very wonderful. He
had a ring, a golden ring, a precious ring.

“My birthday-present!” he whispered to
himself, as he had often done in the endless
dark days. “That’s what we wants now, yes; we
wants it!”

He wanted it because it was a ring of
power, and if you slipped that ring on your
finger, you were invisible; only in the full sunlight
could you be seen, and then only by your
shadow, and that would be shaky and faint.

“My birthday-present! It came to me on my
birthday, my precious.” So he had always said
to himself. But who knows how Gollum came by
that present, ages ago in the old days when



such rings were still at large in the world?
Perhaps even the Master who ruled them could
not have said. Gollum used to wear it at first, till
it tired him; and then he kept it in a pouch next
his skin, till it galled him; and now usually he hid
it in a hole in the rock on his island, and was
always going back to look at it. And still
sometimes he put it on, when he could not bear
to be parted from it any longer, or when he was
very, very, hungry, and tired of fish. Then he
would creep along dark passages looking for
stray goblins. He might even venture into places
where the torches were lit and made his eyes
blink and smart; for he would be safe. Oh yes,
quite safe. No one would see him, no one would
notice him, till he had his fingers on their throat.
Only a few hours ago he had worn it, and caught
a small goblin-imp. How it squeaked! He still
had a bone or two left to gnaw, but he wanted
something softer.

“Quite safe, yes,” he whispered to himself.
“It won’t see us, will it, my precious? No. It won’t
see us, and its nassty little sword will be
useless, yes quite.”

That is what was in his wicked little mind, as
he slipped suddenly from Bilbo’s side, and
flapped back to his boat, and went off into the
dark. Bilbo thought he had heard the last of him.
Still he waited a while; for he had no idea how



to find his way out alone.

Suddenly he heard a screech. It sent a
shiver down his back. Gollum was cursing and
wailing away in the gloom, not very far off by the
sound of it. He was on his island, scrabbling
here and there, searching and seeking in vain.

“Where iss it? Where iss it?” Bilbo heard
him crying. “Losst it is, my precious, lost, lost!
Curse us and crush us, my precious is lost!”

“What’s the matter?” Bilbo called. “What
have you lost?”

“It mustn’t ask us,” shrieked Gollum. "Not its
business, no, gollum! It’s losst, gollum, gollum,
gollum.”

“Well, so am I,” cried Bilbo, “and I want to
get unlost. And I won the game, and you
promised. So come along! Come and let me
out, and then go on with your looking!” Utterly
miserable as Gollum sounded, Bilbo could not
find much pity in his heart, and he had a feeling
that anything Gollum wanted so much could
hardly be something good. “Come along!” he
shouted.

“No, not yet, precious!” Gollum answered.
“We must search for it, it’s lost, gollum.”

“But you never guessed my last question,
and you promised,” said Bilbo.

"Never guessed!” said Gollum. Then
suddenly out of the gloom came a sharp hiss.



“What has it got in its pocketses? Tell us that. It
must tell first.”

As far as Bilbo knew, there was no
particular reason why he should not tell.
Gollum’s mind had jumped to a guess quicker
than his; naturally, for Gollum had brooded for
ages on this one thing, and he was always
afraid of its being stolen. But Bilbo was
annoyed at the delay. After all, he had won the
game, pretty fairly, at a horrible risk. “Answers
were to be guessed not given,” he said.

“But it wasn’t a fair question,” said Gollum.
“Not a riddle, precious, no.”

“Oh well, if it’s a matter of ordinary
questions,” Bilbo replied, “then I asked one first.
What have you lost? Tell me that!”

“What has it got in its pocketses?” The
sound came hissing louder and sharper, and as
he looked towards it, to his alarm Bilbo now
saw two small points of light peering at him. As
suspicion grew in Gollum’s mind, the light of his
eyes burned with a pale flame.

“What have you lost?” Bilbo persisted.

But now the light in Gollum’s eyes had
become a green fire, and it was coming swiftly
nearer. Gollum was in his boat again, paddling
wildly back to the dark shore; and such a rage
of loss and suspicion was in his heart that no
sword had any more terror for him.



Bilbo could not guess what had maddened
the wretched creature, but he saw that all was
up, and that Gollum meant to murder him at any
rate. Just in time he turned and ran blindly back
up the dark passage down which he had come,
keeping close to the wall and feeling it with his
left hand.

“What has it got in its pocketses?” he heard
the hiss loud behind him, and the splash as
Gollum leapt from his boat. “What have I, I
wonder?” he said to himself, as he panted and
stumbled along. He put his left hand in his
pocket. The ring felt very cold as it quietly
slipped on to his groping forefinger.

The hiss was close behind him. He turned
now and saw Gollum’s eyes like small green
lamps coming up the slope. Terrified he tried to
run faster, but suddenly he struck his toes on a
snag in the floor, and fell flat with his little sword
under him.

In a moment Gollum was on him. But before
Bilbo could do anything, recover his breath,
pick himself up, or wave his sword, Gollum
passed by, taking no notice of him, cursing and
whispering as he ran.

What could it mean? Gollum could see in
the dark. Bilbo could see the light of his eyes
palely shining even from behind. Painfully he got
up, and sheathed his sword, which was now



glowing faintly again, then very cautiously he
followed. There seemed nothing else to do. It
was no good crawling back down to Gollum’s
water. Perhaps if he followed him, Gollum might
lead him to some way of escape without
meaning to.

“Curse it! curse it! curse it!” hissed Gollum.
“Curse the Baggins! It’s gone! What has it got
in its pocketses? Oh we guess, we guess, my
precious. He’s found it, yes he must have. My
birthday-present.”

Bilbo pricked up his ears. He was at last
beginning to guess himself. He hurried a little,
getting as close as he dared behind Gollum,
who was still going quickly, not looking back,
but turning his head from side to side, as Bilbo
could see from the faint glimmer on the walls.

“My birthday-present! Curse it! How did we
lose it, my precious? Yes, that’s it. When we
came this way last, when we twisted that nassty
young squeaker. That’s it. Curse it! It slipped
from us, after all these ages and ages! It’s
gone, gollum."

Suddenly Gollum sat down and began to
weep, a whistling and gurgling sound horrible to
listen to. Bilbo halted and flattened himself
against the tunnel-wall. After a while Gollum
stopped weeping and began to talk. He
seemed to be having an argument with himself.



“It’s no good going back there to search,
no. We doesn’t remember all the places we’ve
visited. And it’s no use. The Baggins has got it
in its pocketses; the nassty noser has found it,
we says."

“We guesses, precious, only guesses. We
can’t know till we find the nassty creature and
squeezes it. But it doesn’t know what the
present can do, does it? It’ll just keep it in its
pocketses. It doesn’t know, and it can’t go far.
It’s lost itself, the nassty nosey thing. It doesn’t
know the way out. It said so.”

“It said so, yes; but it’s tricksy. It doesn’t say
what it means. It won’t say what it’s got in its
pocketses. It knows. It knows a way in, it must
know a way out, yes. It’s off to the back-door. To
the back-door, that’s it.”

“The goblinses will catch it then. It can’t get
out that way, precious.”

“Ssss, sss, gollum! Goblinses! Yes, but if
it’s got the present, our precious present, then
goblinses will get it, gollum! They’ll find it, they’ll
find out what it does. We shan’t ever be safe
again, never, gollum! One of the goblinses will
put it on, and then no one will see him. He’ll be
there but not seen. Not even our clever eyeses
will notice him; and he’ll come creepsy and
tricksy and catch us, gollum, gollum!”

“Then let’s stop talking, precious, and make



haste, tf the Baggins has gone that way, we
must go quick and see. Go! Not far now. Make
haste!”

With a spring Gollum got up and started
shambling off at a great pace. Bilbo hurried
after him, still cautiously, though his chief fear
now was of tripping on another snag and falling
with a noise. His head was in a whirl of hope
and wonder. It seemed that the ring he had was
a magic ring: it made you invisible! He had
heard of such things, of course, in old old tales;
but it was hard to believe that he really had
found one, by accident. Still there it was: Gollum
with his bright eyes had passed him by, only a
yard to one side.

On they went, Gollum flip-flapping ahead,
hissing and cursing; Bilbo behind going as
softly as a hobbit can. Soon they came to
places where, as Bilbo had noticed on the way
down, side-passages opened, this way and
that. Gollum began at once to count them.

“One left, yes. One right, yes. Two right, yes,
yes. Two left, yes, yes.” And so on and on.

As the count grew he slowed down, and he
began to get shaky and weepy; for he was
leaving the water further and further behind, and
he was getting afraid. Goblins might be about,
and he had lost his ring. At last he stopped by a
low opening, on their left as they went up.



“Seven right, yes. Six left, yes!” he
whispered. “This is it. This is the way to the
back-door, yes. Here’s the passage!”

He peered in, and shrank back. “But we
dursn’t go in, precious, no we dursn’t.
Goblinses down there. Lots of goblinses. We
smells them. Ssss!”

“What shall we do? Curse them and crush
them! We must wait here, precious, wait a bit
and see.”

So they came to a dead stop. Gollum had
brought Bilbo to the way out after all, but Bilbo
could not get in! There was Gollum sitting
humped up right in the opening, and his eyes
gleamed cold in his head, as he swayed it from
side to side between his knees.

Bilbo crept away from the wall more quietly
than a mouse; but Gollum stiffened at once, and
sniffed, and his eyes went green. He hissed
softly but menacingly. He could not see the
hobbit, but now he was on the alert, and he had
other senses that the darkness had sharpened:
hearing and smell. He seemed to be crouched
right down with his flat hands splayed on the
floor, and his head thrust out, nose almost to the
stone. Though he was only a black shadow in
the gleam of his own eyes, Bilbo could see or
feel that he was tense as a bowstring, gathered
for a spring.



Bilbo almost stopped breathing, and went
stiff himself. He was desperate. He must get
away, out of this horrible darkness, while he had
any strength left. He must fight. He must stab
the foul thing, put its eyes out, kill it. It meant to
kill him. No, not a fair fight. He was invisible
now. Gollum had no sword. Gollum had not
actually threatened to kill him, or tried to yet.
And he was miserable, alone, lost. A sudden
understanding, a pity mixed with horror, welled
up in Bilbo’s heart: a glimpse of endless
unmarked days without light or hope of
betterment, hard stone, cold fish, sneaking and
whispering. All these thoughts passed in a flash
of a second. He trembled. And then quite
suddenly in another flash, as if lifted by a new
strength and resolve, he leaped.

No great leap for a man, but a leap in the
dark. Straight over Gollum’s head he jumped,
seven feet forward and three in the air; indeed,
had he known it, he only just missed cracking
his skull on the low arch of the passage.

Gollum threw himself backwards, and
grabbed as the hobbit flew over him, but too
late: his hands snapped on thin air, and Bilbo,
falling fair on his sturdy feet, sped off down the
new tunnel. He did not turn to see what Gollum
was doing. There was a hissing and cursing
almost at his heels at first, then it stopped. All at



once there came a blood-curdling shriek, filled
with hatred and despair. Gollum was defeated.
He dared go no further. He had lost: lost his
prey, and lost, too, the only thing he had ever
cared for, his precious. The cry brought Bilbo’s
heart to his mouth, but still he held on. Now faint
as an echo, but menacing, the voice came
behind:

“Thief, thief, thief! Bag gins! We hates it, we
hates it, we hates it for ever!”