Before long the dwarves could be seen coming
up the valley at a great pace. They halted
between the river and the eastern spur; but a
few held on their way, and crossing the river
drew near the camp; and there they laid down
their weapons and held up their hands in sign of
peace. Bard went out to meet them, and with
him went Bilbo.

“We are sent from Dain son of Nain,” they
said when questioned. “We are hastening to
our kinsmen in the Mountain, since we learn that
the kingdom of old is renewed. But who are you
that sit in the plain as foes before defended
walls?” This, of course, in the polite and rather
old-fashioned language of such occasions,
meant simply: “You have no business here. We
are going on, so make way or we shall fight
you!” They meant to push on between the
Mountain and the loop of the river; for the
narrow land there did not seem to be strongly
guarded.

Bard, of course, refused to allow the
dwarves to go straight on to the Mountain. He
was determined to wait until the gold and silver
had been brought out in exchange for the
Arkenstone; for he did not believe that this
would be done, if once the fortress was manned
with so large and warlike a company. They had
brought with them a great store of supplies; for



the dwarves can carry very heavy burdens, and
nearly all of Dain’s folk, in spite of their rapid
march, bore huge packs on their backs in
addition to their weapons. They would stand a
siege for weeks, and by that time yet more
dwarves might come, and yet more, for Thorin
had many relatives. Also they would be able to
reopen and guard some other gate, so that the
besiegers would have to encircle the whole
mountain; and for that they had not sufficient
numbers.

These were, in fact, precisely their plans
(for the raven-messengers had been busy
between Thorin and Dain); but for the moment
the way was barred, so after angry words the
dwarf-messengers retired muttering in their
beards. Bard then sent messengers at once to
the Gate; but they found no gold or payment.
Arrows came forth as soon as they were within
shot, and they hastened back in dismay. In the
camp all was now astir, as if for battle; for the
dwarves of Dain were advancing along the
eastern bank.

“Fools!” laughed Bard, “to come thus
beneath the Mountain’s arm! They do not
understand war above ground, whatever they
may know of battle in the mines. There are
many of our archers and spearmen now hidden
in the rocks upon their right flank. Dwarf-mail



may be good, but they will soon be hard put to
it. Let us set on them now from both sides,
before they are fully rested!”

But the Elvenking said: “Long will I tarry, ere
I begin this war for gold. The dwarves cannot
pass us, unless we will, or do anything that we
cannot mark. Let us hope still for something that
will bring reconciliation. Our advantage in
numbers will be enough, if in the end it must
come to unhappy blows.”

But he reckoned without the dwarves. The
knowledge that the Arkenstone was in the
hands of the besiegers burned in their thoughts;
also they guessed the hesitation of Bard and
his friends, and resolved to strike while they
debated.

Suddenly without a signal they sprang
silently forward to attack. Bows twanged and
arrows whistled; battle was about to be joined.

Still more suddenly a darkness came on
with dreadful swiftness! A black cloud hurried
over the sky. Winter thunder on a wild wind
rolled roaring up and rumbled in the Mountain,
and lightning lit its peak. And beneath the
thunder another blackness could be seen
whirling forward; but it did not come with the
wind, it came from the North, like a vast cloud of
birds, so dense that no light could be seen
between their wings.



“Halt!” cried Gandalf, who appeared
suddenly, and stood alone, with arms uplifted,
between the advancing dwarves and the ranks
awaiting them. “Halt!” he called in a voice like
thunder, and his staff blazed forth with a flash
like the lightning. “Dread has come upon you
all! Alas! it has come more swiftly than I
guessed. The Goblins are upon you! Bolg- of
the North is coming, O Dain! whose father you
slew in Moria. Behold! the bats are above his
army like a sea of locusts. They ride upon
wolves and Wargs are in their train!”

Amazement and confusion fell upon them
all. Even as Gandalf had been speaking the
darkness grew. The dwarves halted and gazed
at the sky. The elves cried out with many voices.

“Come!” called Gandalf. “There is yet time
for council. Let Dain son of Nain come swiftly to
us!”


So began a battle that none had expected; and
it was called the Battle of Five Armies, and it
was very terrible. Upon one side were the
Goblins and the Wild Wolves, and upon the
other were Elves and Men and Dwarves. This is
how it fell out. Ever since the fall of the Great
Goblin of the Misty Mountains the hatred of their


race for the dwarves had been rekindled to fury.
Messengers had passed to and fro between all
their cities, colonies and strongholds; for they
resolved now to win the dominion of the North.
Tidings they had gathered in secret ways; and
in all the mountains there was a forging and an
arming. Then they marched and gathered by hill
and valley, going ever by tunnel or under dark,
until around and beneath the great mountain
Gundabad of the North, where was their capital,
a vast host was assembled ready to sweep
down in time of storm unawares upon the
South. Then they learned of the death of
Smaug, and joy was in their hearts; and they
hastened night after night through the
mountains, and came thus at last on a sudden
from the North hard on the heels of Dain. Not
even the ravens knew of their coming until they
came out in the broken lands which divided the
Lonely Mountain from the hills behind. How
much Gandalf knew cannot be said, but it is
plain that he had not expected this sudden
assault.

This is the plan that he made in council with
the Elven-king and with Bard; and with Dain, for
the dwarf-lord now joined them: the Goblins
were the foes of all, and at their coming all other
quarrels were forgotten. Their only hope was to
lure the goblins into the valley between the arms



of the Mountain; and themselves to man the
great spurs that struck south and east. Yet this
would be perilous, if the goblins were in
sufficient numbers to overrun the Mountain
itself, and so attack them also from behind and
above; but there was no time to make any other
plan, or to summon any help.

Soon the thunder passed, rolling away to
the South-East; but the bat-cloud came, flying
lower, over the shoulder of the Mountain, and
whirled above them shutting out the light and
filling them with dread.

“To the Mountain!” called Bard. “To the
Mountain! Let us take our places while there is
yet time!”

On the Southern spur, in its lower slopes
and in the rocks at its feet, the Elves were set;
on the Eastern spur were men and dwarves.
But Bard and some of the nimblest of men and
elves climbed to the height of the Eastern
shoulder to gain a view to the North. Soon they
could see the lands before the Mountain’s feet
black with a hurrying multitude. Ere long the
vanguard swirled round the spur’s end and
came rushing into Dale. These were the
swiftest wolf-riders, and already their cries and
howls rent the air afar. A few brave men were
strung before them to make a feint of
resistance, and many there fell before the rest



drew back and fled to either side. As Gandalf
had hoped, the goblin army had gathered
behind the resisted vanguard, and poured now
in rage into the valley, driving wildly up between
the arms of the Mountain, seeking for the foe.
Their banners were countless, black and red,
and they came on like a tide in fury and
disorder.

It was a terrible battle. The most dreadful of
all Bilbo’s experiences, and the one which at
the time he hated most — which is to say it was
the one he was most proud of, and most fond of
recalling long afterwards, although he was quite
unimportant in it. Actually I may say he put on
his ring early in the business, and vanished
from sight, if not from all danger. A magic ring
of that sort is not a complete protection in a
goblin charge, nor does it stop flying arrows
and wild spears; but it does help in getting out
of the way, and it prevents your head from being
specially chosen for a sweeping stroke by a
goblin swordsman.

The elves were the first to charge. Their
hatred for the goblins is cold and bitter. Their
spears and swords shone in the gloom with a
gleam of chill flame, so deadly was the wrath of
the hands that held them. As soon as the host of
their enemies was dense in the valley, they sent
against it a shower of arrows, and each



flickered as it fled as if with stinging fire. Behind
the arrows a thousand of their spearmen leapt
down and charged. The yells were deafening.
The rocks were stained black with goblin blood.

Just as the goblins were recovering from
the onslaught and the elf-charge was halted,
there rose from across the valley a deep-
throated roar. With cries of “Moria!” and “Dain,
Dain!” the dwarves of the Iron Hills plunged in,
wielding their mattocks, upon the other side;
and beside them came the men of the Lake
with long swords.

Panic came upon the Goblins; and even as
they turned to meet this new attack, the elves
charged again with renewed numbers. Already
many of the goblins were flying back down the
river to escape from the trap; and many of their
own wolves were turning upon them and
rending the dead and the wounded. Victory
seemed at hand, when a cry rang out on the
heights above.

Goblins had scaled the Mountain from the
other side and already many were on the
slopes above the Gate, and others were
streaming down recklessly, heedless of those
that fell screaming from cliff and precipice, to
attack the spurs from above. Each of these
could be reached by paths that ran down from
the main mass of the Mountain in the centre;



and the defenders had too few to bar the way
for long. Victory now vanished from hope. They
had only stemmed the first onslaught of the
black tide.

Day drew on. The goblins gathered again in
the valley. There a host of Wargs came
ravening and with them came the bodyguard of
Bolg, goblins of huge size with scimitars of
steel. Soon actual darkness was coming into a
stormy sky; while still the great bats swirled
about the heads and ears of elves and men, or
fastened vampire-like on the stricken. Now
Bard was fighting to defend the Eastern spur,
and yet giving slowly back; and the elf-lords
were at bay about their king upon the southern
arm, near to the watch-post on Ravenhill.

Suddenly there was a great shout, and from
the Gate came a trumpet call. They had
forgotten Thorin! Part of the wall, moved by
levers, fell outward with a crash into the pool.
Out leapt the King under the Mountain, and his
companions followed him. Hood and cloak
were gone; they were in shining armour, and
red light leapt from their eyes. In the gloom the
great dwarf gleamed like gold in a dying fire.

Rocks were hurled down from on high by
the goblins above; but they held on, leapt down
to the falls’ foot, and rushed forward to battle.
Wolf and rider fell or fled before them. Thorin



wielded his axe with mighty strokes, and
nothing seemed to harm him.

“To me! To me! Elves and Men! To me! O
my kinsfolk!” he cried, and his voice shook like
a horn in the valley.

Down, heedless of order, rushed all the
dwarves of Dain to his help. Down too came
many of the Lake-men, for Bard could not
restrain them; and out upon the other side came
many of the spearmen of the elves. Once again
the goblins were stricken in the valley; and they
were piled in heaps till Dale was dark and
hideous with their corpses. The Wargs were
scattered and Thorin drove right against the
bodyguard of Bolg. But he could not pierce their
ranks.

Already behind him among the goblin dead
lay many men and many dwarves, and many a
fair elf that should have lived yet long ages
merrily in the wood. And as the valley widened
his onset grew ever slower. His numbers were
too few. His flanks were unguarded. Soon the
attackers were attacked, and they were forced
into a great ring, facing every way, hemmed all
about with goblins and wolves returning to the
assault. The bodyguard of Bolg came howling
against them, and drove in upon their ranks like
waves upon cliffs of sand. Their friends could
not help them, for the assault from the Mountain



was renewed with redoubled force, and upon
either side men and elves were being slowly
beaten down.

On all this Bilbo looked with misery. He had
taken his stand on Ravenhill among the Elves —
partly because there was more chance of
escape from that point, and partly (with the
more Tookish part of his mind) because if he
was going to be in a last desperate stand, he
preferred on the whole to defend the Elvenking.
Gandalf, too, I may say, was there, sitting on the
ground as if in deep thought, preparing, I
suppose, some last blast of magic before the
end.

That did not seem far off. “It will not be long
now,” thought Bilbo, “before the goblins win the
Gate, and we are all slaughtered or driven down
and captured. Really it is enough to make one
weep, after all one has gone through. I would
rather old Smaug had been left with all the
wretched treasure, than that these vile creatures
should get it, and poor old Bombur, and Balin
and Fili and Kili and all the rest come to a bad
end; and Bard too, and the Lake-men and the
merry elves. Misery me! I have heard songs of
many battles, and I have always understood that
defeat may be glorious. It seems very
uncomfortable, not to say distressing. I wish I
was well out of it.”



The clouds were torn by the wind, and a red
sunset slashed the West. Seeing the sudden
gleam in the gloom Bilbo looked round. He
gave a great cry: he had seen a sight that made
his heart leap, dark shapes small yet majestic
against the distant glow.

“The Eagles! The Eagles!” he shouted. “The
Eagles are coming!”

Bilbo’s eyes were seldom wrong. The
eagles were coming down the wind, line after
line, in such a host as must have gathered from
all the eyries of the North.

“The Eagles! the Eagles!” Bilbo cried,
dancing and waving his arms. If the elves could
not see him they could hear him. Soon they too
took up the cry, and it echoed across the valley.
Many wondering eyes looked up, though as yet
nothing could be seen except from the southern
shoulders of the Mountain.

“The Eagles!” cried Bilbo once more, but at
that moment a stone hurtling from above smote
heavily on his helm, and he fell with a crash and
knew no more.




Chapter XVIII


THE RETURN JOURNEY


When Bilbo came to himself, he was literally by
himself. He was lying on the flat stones of
Ravenhill, and no one was near. A cloudless
day, but cold, was broad above him. He was
shaking, and as chilled as stone, but his head
burned with fire.

"Now I wonder what has happened?” he
said to himself. “At any rate I am not yet one of
the fallen heroes; but I suppose there is still time
enough for that!”

He sat up painfully. Looking into the valley
he could see no living goblins. After a while as
his head cleared a little, he thought he could
see elves moving in the rocks below. He
rubbed his eyes. Surely there was a camp still
in the plain some distance off; and there was a
coming and going about the Gate? Dwarves
seemed to be busy removing the wall. But all
was deadly still. There was no call and no echo


of a song. Sorrow seemed to be in the air.

“Victory after all, I suppose!” he said, feeling
his aching head. “Well, it seems a very gloomy
business.”

Suddenly he was aware of a man climbing
up and coming towards him.

“Hullo there!” he called with a shaky voice.
“Hullo there! What news?”

“What voice is it that speaks among the
stones?” said the man halting and peering
about him not far from where Bilbo sat.

Then Bilbo remembered his ring! “Well I’m
blessed!” said he. “This invisibility has its
drawbacks after all. Otherwise I suppose I might
have spent a warm and comfortable night in
bed!”

“It’s me, Bilbo Baggins, companion of
Thorin!” he cried, hurriedly taking off the ring.

“It is well that I have found you!” said the
man striding forward. “You are needed and we
have looked for you long. You would have been
numbered among the dead, who are many, if
Gandalf the wizard had not said that your voice
was last heard in this place. I have been sent to
look here for the last time. Are you much hurt?”

“A nasty knock on the head, I think,” said
Bilbo. “But I have a helm and a hard skull. All the
same I feel sick and my legs are like straws.”

“I will carry you down to the camp in the



valley,” said the man, and picked him lightly up.

The man was swift and sure-footed. It was
not long before Bilbo was set down before a
tent in Dale; and there stood Gandalf, with his
arm in a sling. Even the wizard had not
escaped without a wound; and there were few
unharmed in all the host.

When Gandalf saw Bilbo, he was delighted.
“Baggins!” he exclaimed. “Well I never! Alive
after all — I am glad! I began to wonder if even
your luck would see you through! A terrible
business, and it nearly was disastrous. But
other news can wait. Come!” he said more
gravely. “You are called for;” and leading the
hobbit he took him within the tent.

“Hail! Thorin,” he said as he entered. “I have
brought him.”

There indeed lay Thorin Oakenshield,
wounded with many wounds, and his rent
armour and notched axe were cast upon the
floor. He looked up as Bilbo came beside him.

“Farewell, good thief,” he said. “I go now to
the halls of waiting to sit beside my fathers, until
the world is renewed. Since I leave now all gold
and silver, and go where it is of little worth, I
wish to part in friendship from you, and I would
take back my words and deeds at the Gate.”

Bilbo knelt on one knee filled with sorrow.
“Farewell, King under the Mountain!” he said.



“This is a bitter adventure, if it must end so; and
not a mountain of gold can amend it. Yet I am
glad that I have shared in your perils — that has
been more than any Baggins deserves.”

“No!” said Thorin. “There is more in you of
good than you know, child of the kindly West.
Some courage and some wisdom, blended in
measure. If more of us valued food and cheer
and song above hoarded gold, it would be a
merrier world. But sad or merry, I must leave it
now. Farewell!”

Then Bilbo turned away, and he went by
himself, and sat alone wrapped in a blanket,
and, whether you believe it or not, he wept until
his eyes were red and his voice was hoarse.
He was a kindly little soul. Indeed it was long
before he had the heart to make a joke again.
“A mercy it is,” he said at last to himself, “that I
woke up when I did. I wish Thorin were living,
but I am glad that we parted in kindness. You
are a fool, Bilbo Baggins, and you made a
great mess of that business with the stone; and
there was a battle, in spite of all your efforts to
buy peace and quiet, but I suppose you can
hardly be blamed for that.”


All that had happened after he was stunned,



Bilbo learned later; but it gave him more sorrow
than joy, and he was now weary of his
adventure. He was aching in his bones for the
homeward journey That, however, was a little
delayed, so in the meantime I will tell something
of events. The Eagles had long had suspicion
of the goblins’ mustering; from their
watchfulness the movements in the mountains
could not be altogether hid. So they too had
gathered in great numbers, under the great
Eagle of the Misty Mountains; and at length
smelling battle from afar they had come
speeding down the gale in the nick of time.
They it was who dislodged the goblins from the
mountain-slopes, casting them over precipices,
or driving them down shrieking and bewildered
among their foes. It was not long before they
had freed the Lonely Mountain, and elves and
men on either side of the valley could come at
last to the help of the battle below.

But even with the Eagles they were still
outnumbered. In that last hour Beorn himself
had appeared — no one knew how or from
where. He came alone, and in bear’s shape;
and he seemed to have grown almost to giant-
size in his wrath.

The roar of his voice was like drums and
guns; and he tossed wolves and goblins from
his path like straws and feathers. He fell upon



their rear, and broke like a clap of thunder
through the ring. The dwarves were making a
stand still about their lords upon a low rounded
hill. Then Beorn stooped and lifted Thorin, who
had fallen pierced with spears, and bore him
out of the fray.

Swiftly he returned and his wrath was
redoubled, so that nothing could withstand him,
and no weapon seemed to bite upon him. He
scattered the bodyguard, and pulled down Bolg
himself and crushed him. Then dismay fell on
the Goblins and they fled in all directions. But
weariness left their enemies with the coming of
new hope, and they pursued them closely, and
prevented most of them from escaping where
they could. They drove many of them into the
Running River, and such as fled south or west
they hunted into the marshes about the Forest
River; and there the greater part of the last
fugitives perished, while those that came hardly
to the Wood-elves’ realm were there slain, or
drawn in to die deep in the trackless dark of
Mirkwood. Songs have said that three parts of
the goblin warriors of the North perished on that
day, and the mountains had peace for many a
year.

Victory had been assured before the fall of
night; but the pursuit was still on foot, when
Bilbo returned to the camp; and not many were



in the valley save the more grievously wounded.

“Where are the Eagles?” he asked Gandalf
that evening, as he lay wrapped in many warm
blankets.

“Some are in the hunt,” said the wizard, “but
most have gone back to their eyries. They
would not stay here, and departed with the first
light of morning. Dain has crowned their chief
with gold, and sworn friendship with them
forever.”

“I am sorry. I mean, I should have liked to
see them again,” said Bilbo sleepily; “perhaps I
shall see them on the way home. I suppose I
shall be going home soon?”

“As soon as you like,” said the wizard.

Actually it was some days before Bilbo
really set out. They buried Thorin deep beneath
the Mountain, and Bard laid the Arkenstone
upon his breast.

“There let it lie till the Mountain falls!” he
said. “May it bring good fortune to all his folk
that dwell here after!”

Upon his tomb the Elvenking then laid
Orcrist, the elvish sword that had been taken
from Thorin in captivity. It is said in songs that it
gleamed ever in the dark if foes approached,
and the fortress of the dwarves could not be
taken by surprise. There now Dain son of Nain
took up his abode, and he became King under



the Mountain, and in time many other dwarves
gathered to his throne in the ancient halls. Of
the twelve companions of Thorin, ten remained.
Fili and Kili had fallen defending him with shield
and body, for he was their mother’s elder
brother. The others remained with Dain; for
Dain dealt his treasure well.

There was, of course, no longer any
question of dividing the hoard in such shares as
had been planned, to Balin and Dwalin, and
Dori and Nori and Ori, and Oin and Gloin, and
Bifur and Bofur and Bombur — or to Bilbo. Yet a
fourteenth share of all the silver and gold,
wrought and unwrought, was given up to Bard;
for Dain said: “We will honour the agreement of
the dead, and he has now the Arkenstone in his
keeping.”

Even a fourteenth share was wealth
exceedingly great, greater than that of many
mortal kings. From that treasure Bard sent
much gold to the Master of Lake-town; and he
rewarded his followers and friends freely. To the
Elvenking he gave the emeralds of Girion, such
jewels as he most loved, which Dain had
restored to him.

To Bilbo he said: “This treasure is as much
yours as it is mine; though old agreements
cannot stand, since so many have a claim in its
winning and defence. Yet even though you were



willing to lay aside all your claim, I should wish
that the words of Thorin, of which he repented,
should not prove true: that we should give you
little. I would reward you most richly of all.”

“Very kind of you,” said Bilbo. “But really it
is a relief to me. How on earth should I have got
all that treasure home without war and murder
all along the way, I don’t know. And I don’t know
what I should have done with it when I got home.
I am sure it is better in your hands.”

In the end he would only take two small
chests, one filled with silver, and the other with
gold, such as one strong pony could carry. “That
will be quite as much as I can manage,” said
he.

At last the time came for him to say good-
bye to his friends. “Farewell, Balin!” he said;
“and farewell, Dwalin; and farewell Dori, Nori,
Ori, Oin, Gloin, Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur! May
your beards never grow thin!” And turning
towards the Mountain he added: “Farewell
Thorin Oakenshield! And Fili and Kili! May your
memory never fade!”

Then the dwarves bowed low before their
Gate, but words stuck in their throats. “Good-
bye and good luck, wherever you fare!” said
Balin at last. “If ever you visit us again, when our
halls are made fair once more, then the feast
shall indeed be splendid!”



“If ever you are passing my way,” said
Bilbo, “don’t wait to knock! Tea is at four; but
any of you are welcome at anytime!”

Then he turned away.


The elf-host was on the march; and if it was
sadly lessened, yet many were glad, for now the
northern world would be merrier for many a long
day. The dragon was dead, and the goblins
overthrown, and their hearts looked forward
after winter to a spring of joy.

Gandalf and Bilbo rode behind the
Elvenking, and beside them strode Beorn, once
again in man’s shape, and he laughed and
sang in a loud voice upon the road. So they
went on until they drew near to the borders of
Mirkwood, to the north of the place where the
Forest River ran out. Then they halted, for the
wizard and Bilbo would not enter the wood,
even though the king bade them stay a while in
his halls. They intended to go along the edge of
the forest, and round its northern end in the
waste that lay between it and the beginning of
the Grey Mountains. It was a long and cheerless
road, but now that the goblins were crushed, it
seemed safer to them than the dreadful
pathways under the trees. Moreover Beorn was



going that way too.

“Farewell! O Elvenking!” said Gandalf.
“Merry be the greenwood, while the world is yet
young! And merry be all your folk!”

“Farewell! O Gandalf!” said the king. “May
you ever appear where you are most needed
and least expected! The oftener you appear in
my halls the better shall I be pleased!”

“I beg of you,” said Bilbo stammering and
standing on one foot, “to accept this gift!” and
he brought out a necklace of silver and pearls
that Dain had given him at their parting.

“In what way have I earned such a gift, O
hobbit?” said the king.

“Well, er, I thought, don’t you know,” said
Bilbo rather confused, “that, er, some little return
should be made for your, er, hospitality. I mean
even a burglar has his feelings. I have drunk
much of your wine and eaten much of your
bread.”

“I will take your gift, O Bilbo the
Magnificent!” said the king gravely. “And I name
you elf-friend and blessed. May your shadow
never grow less (or stealing would be too easy)!
Farewell!”

Then the elves turned towards the Forest,
and Bilbo started on his long road home.



He had many hardships and adventures before
he got back. The Wild was still the Wild, and
there were many other things in it in those days
beside goblins; but he was well guided and well
guarded — the wizard was with him, and Beorn
for much of the way — and he was never in great
danger again. Anyway by midwinter Gandalf
and Bilbo had come all the way back, along
both edges of the Forest, to the doors of
Beorn’s house; and there for a while they both
stayed. Yule-tide was warm and merry there;
and men came from far and wide to feast at
Beorn’s bidding. The goblins of the Misty
Mountains were now few and terrified, and
hidden in the deepest holes they could find; and
the Wargs had vanished from the woods, so
that men went abroad without fear. Beorn
indeed became a great chief afterwards in
those regions and ruled a wide land between
the mountains and the wood; and it is said that
for many generations the men of his line had the
power of taking bear’s shape, and some were
grim men and bad, but most were in heart like
Beorn, if less in size and strength. In their day
the last goblins were hunted from the Misty
Mountains and a new peace came over the
edge of the Wild.

It was spring, and a fair one with mild



weathers and a bright sun, before Bilbo and
Gandalf took their leave at last of Beorn, and
though he longed for home, Bilbo left with
regret, for the flowers of the gardens of Beorn
were in springtime no less marvellous than in
high summer.

At last they came up the long road, and
reached the very pass where the goblins had
captured them before. But they came to that
high point at morning, and looking backward
they saw a white sun shining over the
outstretched lands. There behind lay Mirkwood,
blue in the distance, and darkly green at the
nearer edge even in the spring. There far away
was the Lonely Mountain on the edge of
eyesight. On its highest peak snow yet
unmelted was gleaming pale.

“So comes snow after fire, and even
dragons have their ending!” said Bilbo, and he
turned his back on his adventure. The Tookish
part was getting very tired, and the Baggins
was daily getting stronger. “I wish now only to
be in my own armchair!” he said.




Chapter X IX


THE LAST STAGE


It was on May the First that the two came back
at last to the brink of the valley of Rivendell,
where stood the Last (or the First) Homely
House. Again it was evening, their ponies were
tired, especially the one that carried the
baggage; and they all felt in need of rest. As
they rode down the steep path, Bilbo heard the
elves still singing in the trees, as if they had not
stopped since he left; and as soon as the riders
came down into the lower glades of the wood
they burst into a song of much the same kind as
before. This is something like it:


The dragon is withered,

His bones are nowcrumbled;
His armour is shivered,

His splendour is humbled!
Though svnrd shall be rusted,
And throne and crown perish
With strength that men trusted
And wealth that they cherish,
Here grass is still growing,
And leaves are yet swinging,
The white water flowing,

And elves are yet singing

Come! Tra-la-la-lally!

Come back to the valley!


The stars are far brighter
Than gems without measure,
The moon is far whiter
Than silver in treasure;

The fire is more shining
On hearth in the gloaming
Than gold won by mining,

So why go a-roaming?

O! Tra-la-la-lally

Come back to the Valley.


O! Where are you going,

So late in returning?

The river is flowing,

The stars are all burning!
O! Whither so laden,

So sad and so dreary?
Here elf and elf-maiden
Nowwelcome the weary
With Tra-la-la-lally
Come back to the Valley,
Tra-la-la-lally
Fa-1 a-la-l ally
Fa-la!


Then the elves of the valley came out and
greeted them and led them across the water to
the house of Elrond. There a warm welcome
was made them, and there were many eager
ears that evening to hear the tale of their
adventures. Gandalf it was who spoke, for Bilbo
was fallen quiet and drowsy. Most of the tale he
knew, for he had been in it, and had himself told
much of it to the wizard on their homeward way
or in the house of Beorn; but every now and
again he would open one eye, and listen, when
a part of the story which he did not yet know
came in.
