Then there was a silence. But that too
seemed menacing to Bilbo. “If goblins are so
near that he smelt them,” he thought, “then they’ll
have heard his shrieking and cursing. Careful
now, or this way will lead you to worse things.”

The passage was low and roughly made. It
was not too difficult for the hobbit, except when,
in spite of all care, he stubbed his poor toes
again, several times, on nasty jagged stones in
the floor. “A bit low for goblins, at least for the
big ones,” thought Bilbo, not knowing that even
the big ones, the ores of the mountains, go
along at a great speed stooping low with their
hands almost on the ground.

Soon the passage that had been sloping
down began to go up again, and after a while it
climbed steeply. That slowed Bilbo down. But at
last the slope stopped, the passage turned a
corner and dipped down again, and there, at



the bottom of a short incline, he saw, filtering
round another corner — a glimpse of light. Not
red light, as of fire or lantern, but a pale out-of-
doors sort of light. Then Bilbo began to run.

Scuttling as fast as his legs would carry him
he turned the last corner and came suddenly
right into an open space, where the light, after
all that time in the dark, seemed dazzlingly
bright. Really it was only a leak of sunshine in
through a doorway, where a great door, a stone
door, was left standing open.

Bilbo blinked, and then suddenly he saw the
goblins: goblins in full armour with drawn
swords sitting just inside the door, and watching
it with wide eyes, and watching the passage
that led to it. They were aroused, alert, ready for
anything.

They saw him sooner than he saw them.
Yes, they saw him. Whether it was an accident,
or a last trick of the ring before it took a new
master, it was not on his finger. With yells of
delight the goblins rushed upon him.

A pang of fear and loss, like an echo of
Gollum’s misery, smote Bilbo, and forgetting
even to draw his sword he struck his hands into
his pockets. And there was the ring still, in his
left pocket, and it slipped on his finger. The
goblins stopped short. They could not see a
sign of him. He had vanished. They yelled twice



as loud as before, but not so delightedly.

“Where is it?” they cried.

“Go back up the passage!” some shouted.

“This way!” some yelled. “That way!” others
yelled.

“Look out for the door,” bellowed the
captain.

Whistles blew, armour clashed, swords
rattled, goblins cursed and swore and ran hither
and thither, falling over one another and getting
very angry. There was a terrible outcry, to-do,
and disturbance.

Bilbo was dreadfully frightened, but he had
the sense to understand what had happened
and to sneak behind a big barrel which held
drink for the goblin-guards, and so get out of the
way and avoid being bumped into, trampled to
death, or caught by feel.

“I must get to the door, I must get to the
door!” he kept on saying to himself, but it was a
long time before he ventured to try. Then it was
like a horrible game of blind-man’s-buff. The
place was full of goblins running about, and the
poor little hobbit dodged this way and that, was
knocked over by a goblin who could not make
out what he had bumped into, scrambled away
on all fours, slipped between the legs of the
captain just in time, got up, and ran for the door.

It was still ajar, but a goblin had pushed it



nearly to. Bilbo struggled but he could not move
it. He tried to squeeze through the crack. He
squeezed and squeezed, and he stuck! It was
awful. His buttons had got wedged on the edge
of the door and the door-post. He could see
outside into the open air: there were a few
steps running down into a narrow valley
between tall mountains; the sun came out from
behind a cloud and shone bright on the outside
of the door — but he could not get through.

Suddenly one of the goblins inside shouted:
“There is a shadow by the door. Something is
outside!”

Bilbo’s heart jumped into his mouth. He
gave a terrific squirm. Buttons burst off in all
directions. He was through, with a torn coat and
waistcoat, leaping down the steps like a goat,
while bewildered goblins were still picking up
his nice brass buttons on the doorstep.

Of course they soon came down after him,
hooting and hallooing, and hunting among the
trees. But they don’t like the sun: it makes their
legs wobble and their heads giddy. They could
not find Bilbo with the ring on, slipping in and
out of the shadow of the trees, running quick
and quiet, and keeping out of the sun; so soon
they went back grumbling and cursing to guard
the door. Bilbo had escaped.





Chapter VI


OUT OF THE FRYING-PAN INTO

THE FIRE


Bilbo had escaped the goblins, but he did not
know where he was. He had lost hood, cloak,
food, pony, his buttons and his friends. He
wandered on and on, till the sun began to sink
westwards — behind the mountains. Their
shadows fell across Bilbo’s path, and he looked
back. Then he looked forward and could see
before him only ridges and slopes falling
towards lowlands and plains glimpsed
occasionally between the trees.

“Good heavens!” he exclaimed. “I seem to
have got right to the other side of the Misty
Mountains, right to the edge of the Land
Beyond! Where and O where can Gandalf and
the dwarves have got to? I only hope to
goodness they are not still back there in the
power of the goblins!”

He still wandered on, out of the little high
valley, over its edge, and down the slopes
beyond; but all the while a very uncomfortable


thought was growing inside him. He wondered
whether he ought not, now he had the magic
ring, to go back into the horrible, horrible,
tunnels and look for his friends. He had just
made up his mind that it was his duty, that he
must turn back — and very miserable he felt
about it — when he heard voices.

He stopped and listened. It did not sound
like goblins; so he crept forward carefully. He
was on a stony path winding downwards with a
rocky wall on the left hand; on the other side the
ground sloped away and there were dells below
the level of the path overhung with bushes and
low trees. In one of these dells under the bushes
people were talking.

He crept still nearer, and suddenly he saw
peering between two big boulders a head with
a red hood on: it was Balin doing look-out. He
could have clapped and shouted for joy, but he
did not. He had still got the ring on, for fear of
meeting something unexpected and
unpleasant, and he saw that Balin was looking
straight at him without noticing him.

“I will give them all a surprise,” he thought,
as he crawled into the bushes at the edge of the
dell. Gandalf was arguing with the dwarves.
They were discussing all that had happened to
them in the tunnels, and wondering and
debating what they were to do now. The
dwarves were grumbling, and Gandalf was
saying that they could not possibly go on with



their journey leaving Mr. Baggins in the hands of
the goblins, without trying to find out if he was
alive or dead, and without trying to rescue him.

“After all he is my friend,” said the wizard,
“and not a bad little chap. I feel responsible for
him. I wish to goodness you had not lost him.”

The dwarves wanted to know why he had
ever been brought at all, why he could not stick
to his friends and come along with them, and
why the wizard had not chosen someone with
more sense. “He has been more trouble than
use so far,” said one. “If we have got to go back
now into those abominable tunnels to look for
him, then drat him, I say.”

Gandalf answered angrily: “I brought him,
and I don’t bring things that are of no use. Either
you help me to look for him, or I go and leave
you here to get out of the mess as best you can
yourselves. If we can only find him again, you
will thank me before all is over. Whatever did
you want to go and drop him for, Dori?”

“You would have dropped him,” said Dori,
“if a goblin had suddenly grabbed your legs
from behind in the dark, tripped up your feet,
and kicked you in the back!”

“Then why didn’t you pick him up again?”

“Good heavens! Can you ask! Goblins
fighting and biting in the dark, everybody falling
over bodies and hitting one another! You nearly
chopped off my head with Glamdring, and
Thorin was stabbing here there and everywhere



with Orcrist. All of a sudden you gave one of
your blinding flashes, and we saw the goblins
running back yelping. You shouted ‘follow me
everybody!' and everybody ought to have
followed. We thought everybody had. There was
no time to count, as you know quite well, till we
had dashed through the gate-guards, out of the
lower door, and helter-skelter down here. And
here we are — without the burglar, confusticate
him!”

“And here’s the burglar!” said Bilbo
stepping down into the middle of them, and
slipping off the ring.

Bless me, how they jumped! Then they
shouted with surprise and delight. Gandalf was
as astonished as any of them, but probably
more pleased than all the others. He called to
Balin and told him what he thought of a look-out
man who let people walk right into them like that
without warning. It is a fact that Bilbo’s
reputation went up a very great deal with the
dwarves after this. If they had still doubted that
he was really a first-class burglar, in spite of
Gandalf s words, they doubted no longer. Balin
was the most puzzled of all; but everyone said it
was a very clever bit of work.

Indeed Bilbo was so pleased with their
praise that he just chuckled inside and said
nothing whatever about the ring; and when they
asked him how he did it, he said: “Oh, just crept
along, you know — very carefully and quietly.”



“Well, It is the first time that even a mouse
has crept along carefully and quietly under my
very nose and not been spotted,” said Balin,
“and I take off my hood to you.” Which he did.

“Balin at your service,” said he.

“Your servant, Mr. Baggins,” said Bilbo.

Then they wanted to know all about his
adventures after they had lost him, and he sat
down and told them everything — except about
the finding of the ring (“not just now” he thought).
They were particularly interested in the riddle-
competition, and shuddered most
appreciatively at his description of Gollum.

“And then I couldn’t think of any other
question with him sitting beside me,” ended
Bilbo; “so I said ‘what’s in my pocket?’ And he
couldn’t guess in three goes. So I said: ‘what
about your promise? Show me the way out!’ But
he came at me to kill me, and I ran, and fell
over, and he missed me in the dark. Then I
followed him, because I heard him talking to
himself. He thought I really knew the way out,
and so he was making for it. And then he sat
down in the entrance, and I could not get by. So
I jumped over him and escaped, and ran down
to the gate.”

“What about the guards?” they asked.
“Weren’t there any?”

“O yes! lots of them; but I dodged ’em. I got
stuck in the door, which was only open a crack,
and I lost lots of buttons,” he said sadly looking



at his torn clothes. “But I squeezed through all
right — and here lam.”

The dwarves looked at him with quite a new
respect, when he talked about dodging guards,
jumping over Gollum, and squeezing through,
as if it was not very difficult or very alarming.

“What did I tell you?” said Gandalf laughing.
“Mr. Baggins has more about him than you
guess.” He gave Bilbo a queer look from under
his bushy eyebrows, as he said this, and the
hobbit wondered if he guessed at the part of his
tale that he had left out.

Then he had questions of his own to ask, for
if Gandalf had explained it all by now to the
dwarves, Bilbo had not heard it. He wanted to
know how the wizard had turned up again, and
where they had all got to now.

The wizard, to tell the truth, never minded
explaining his cleverness more than once, so
now he told Bilbo that both he and Elrond had
been well aware of the presence of evil goblins
in that part of the mountains. But their main gate
used to come out on a different pass, one more
easy to travel by, so that they often caught
people benighted near their gates. Evidently
people had given up going that way, and the
goblins must have opened their new entrance at
the top of the pass the dwarves had taken, quite
recently, because it had been found quite safe
up to now.

“I must see if I can’t find a more or less



decent giant to block it up again,” said Gandalf,
‘‘or soon there will be no getting over the
mountains at all.”

As soon as Gandalf had heard Bilbo’s yell
he realized what had happened. In the flash
which killed the goblins that were grabbing him
he had nipped inside the crack, just as it
snapped to. He followed after the drivers and
prisoners right to the edge of the great hall, and
there he sat down and worked up the best
magic he could in the shadows.

“A very ticklish business, it was,” he said.
‘‘Touch and go!”

But, of course, Gandalf had made a special
study of bewitchments with fire and lights (even
the hobbit had never forgotten the magic
fireworks at Old Took’s midsummer-eve
parties, as you remember). The rest we all
know — except that Gandalf knew all about the
back-door, as the goblins called the lower gate,
where Bilbo lost his buttons. As a matter of fact
it was well known to anybody who was
acquainted with this part of the mountains; but it
took a wizard to keep his head in the tunnels
and guide them in the right direction.

“They made that gate ages ago,” he said,
“partly for a way of escape, if they needed one;
partly as a way out into the lands beyond, where
they still come in the dark and do great
damage. They guard it always and no one has
ever managed to block it up. They will guard it



doubly after this,” he laughed.

All the others laughed too. After all they had
lost a good deal, but they had killed the Great
Goblin and a great many others besides, and
they had all escaped, so they might be said to
have had the best of it so far.

But the wizard called them to their senses.
‘‘We must be getting on at once, now we are a
little rested,” he said. “They will be out after us in
hundreds when night comes on; and already
shadows are lengthening. They can smell our
footsteps for hours and hours after we have
passed. We must be miles on before dusk.
There will be a bit of moon, if it keeps fine, and
that is lucky. Not that they mind the moon much,
but it will give us a little light to steer by.”

“O yes!” he said in answer to more
questions from the hobbit. “You lose track of
time inside goblin-tunnels. Today’s Thursday,
and it was Monday night or Tuesday morning
that we were captured. We have gone miles
and miles, and come right down through the
heart of the mountains, and are now on the
other side — quite a short cut. But we are not at
the point to which our pass would have brought
us; we are too far to the North, and have some
awkward country ahead. And we are still pretty
high up. Let’s get on!”

“I am dreadfully hungry,” groaned Bilbo, who
was suddenly aware that he had not had a meal
since the night before the night before last. Just



think of that for a hobbit! His stomach felt all
empty and loose and his legs all wobbly, now
that the excitement was over.

“Can't help it,’’ said Gandalf, “unless you like
to go back and ask the goblins nicely to let you
have your pony back and your luggage.”

“No thank you!” said Bilbo.

“Very well then, we must just tighten our
belts and trudge on — or we shall be made into
supper, and that will be much worse than having
none ourselves.”

As they went on Bilbo looked from side to
side for something to eat; but the blackberries
were still only in flower, and of course there
were no nuts, not even hawthorn-berries. He
nibbled a bit of sorrel, and he drank from a
small mountain-stream that crossed the path,
and he ate three wild strawberries that he found
on its bank, but it was not much good.

They still went on and on. The rough path
disappeared. The bushes, and the long
grasses between the boulders, the patches of
rabbit-cropped turf, the thyme and the sage and
the marjoram, and the yellow rockroses all
vanished, and they found themselves at the top
of a wide steep slope of fallen stones, the
remains of a landslide. When they began to go
down this, rubbish and small pebbles rolled
away from their feet; soon larger bits of split
stone went clattering down and started other
pieces below them slithering and rolling; then



lumps of rock were disturbed and bounded off,
crashing down with a dust and a noise. Before
long the whole slope above them and below
them seemed on the move, and they were
sliding away, huddled all together, in a fearful
confusion of slipping, rattling, cracking slabs
and stones.

It was the trees at the bottom that saved
them. They slid into the edge of a climbing
wood of pines that here stood right up the
mountain slope from the deeper darker forests
of the valleys below. Some caught hold of the
trunks and swung themselves into lower
branches, some (like the little hobbit) got
behind a tree to shelter from the onslaught of
the rocks. Soon the danger was over, the slide
had stopped, and the last faint crashes could
be heard as the largest of the disturbed stones
went bounding and spinning among the
bracken and the pine-roots far below.

“Well! that has got us on a bit,” said
Gandalf; “and even goblins tracking us will have
a job to come down here quietly.”

“I daresay,” grumbled Bombur; “but they
won’t find it difficult to send stones bouncing
down on our heads.” The dwarves (and Bilbo)
were feeling far from happy, and were rubbing
their bruised and damaged legs and feet.

“Nonsense! We are going to turn aside
here out of the path of the slide. We must be
quick! Look at the light!”



The sun had long gone behind the
mountains. Already the shadows were
deepening about them, though far away through
the trees and over the black tops of those
growing lower down they could still see the
evening lights on the plains beyond. They
limped along now as fast as they were able
down the gentle slopes of a pine forest in a
slanting path leading steadily southwards. At
times they were pushing through a sea of
bracken with tall fronds rising right above the
hobbit’s head; at times they were marching
along quiet as quiet over a floor of pine-
needles; and all the while the forest-gloom got
heavier and the forest-silence deeper. There
was no wind that evening to bring even a sea-
sighing into the branches of the trees.


“Must we go any further?” asked Bilbo, when it
was so dark that he could only just see Thorin's
beard wagging beside him, and so quiet that he
could hear the dwarves’ breathing like a loud
noise. “My toes are all bruised and bent, and
my legs ache, and my stomach is wagging like
an empty sack.”

“A bit further,” said Gandalf.

After what seemed ages further they came
suddenly to an opening where no trees grew.
The moon was up and was shining into the
clearing. Somehow it struck all of them as not at



all a nice place, although there was nothing
wrong to see.

All of a sudden they heard a howl away
down hill, a long shuddering howl. It was
answered by another away to the right and a
good deal nearer to them; then by another not
far away to the left. It was wolves howling at the
moon, wolves gathering together!

There were no wolves living near Mr.
Baggins’ hole at home, but he knew that noise.
He had had it described to him often enough in
tales. One of his elder cousins (on the Took
side), who had been a great traveller, used to
imitate it to frighten him. To hear it out in the
forest under the moon was too much for Bilbo.
Even magic rings are not much use against
wolves — especially against the evil packs that
lived under the shadow of the goblin-infested
mountains, over the Edge of the Wild on the
borders of the unknown. Wolves of that sort
smell keener than goblins, and do not need to
see you to catch you!

“What shall we do, what shall we do!” he
cried. “Escaping goblins to be caught by
wolves!” he said, and it became a proverb,
though we now say “out of the frying-pan into the
fire” in the same sort of uncomfortable
situations.

“Up the trees quick!” cried Gandalf; and
they ran to the trees at the edge of the glade,
hunting for those that had branches fairly low, or



were slender enough to swarm up. They found
them as quick as ever they could, you can
guess; and up they went as high as ever they
could trust the branches. You would have
laughed (from a safe distance), if you had seen
the dwarves sitting up in the trees with their
beards dangling down, like old gentlemen gone
cracked and playing at being boys. Fili and Kili
were at the top of a tall larch like an enormous
Christmas tree. Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin, and Gloin
were more comfortable in a huge pine with
regular branches sticking out at intervals like
the spokes of a wheel. Bifur, Bofur, Bombur,
and Thorin were in another. Dwalin and Balin
had swarmed up a tall slender fir with few
branches and were trying to find a place to sit in
the greenery of the topmost boughs. Gandalf,
who was a good deal taller than the others, had
found a tree into which they could not climb, a
large pine standing at the very edge of the
glade. He was quite hidden in its boughs, but
you could see his eyes gleaming in the moon
as he peeped out.

And Bilbo? He could not get into any tree,
and was scuttling about from trunk to trunk, like
a rabbit that has lost its hole and has a dog
after it.

“You’ve left the burglar behind again!’’ said
Nori to Dori looking down.

“I can’t be always carrying burglars on my
back,” said Dori, “down tunnels and up trees!



What do you think I am? A porter?”

“He’ll be eaten if we don't do something,”
said Thorin, for there were howls all round them
now, getting nearer and nearer. “Dori!” he
called, for Dori was lowest down in the easiest
tree, “be quick, and give Mr. Baggins a hand
up!”

Dori was really a decent fellow in spite of
his grumbling. Poor Bilbo could not reach his
hand even when he climbed down to the bottom
branch and hung his arm down as far as ever
he could. So Dori actually climbed out of the
tree and let Bilbo scramble up and stand on his
back.

Just at that moment the wolves trotted
howling into the clearing. All of a sudden there
were hundreds of eyes looking at them. Still
Dori did not let Bilbo down. He waited till he
had clambered off his shoulders into the
branches, and then he jumped for the branches
himself. Only just in time! A wolf snapped at his
cloak as he swung up, and nearly got him. In a
minute there was a whole pack of them yelping
all round the tree and leaping up at the trunk,
with eyes blazing and tongues hanging out.

But even the wild Wargs (for so the evil
wolves over the Edge of the Wild were named)
cannot climb trees. For a time they were safe.
Luckily it was warm and not windy. Trees are
not very comfortable to sit in for long at any
time; but in the cold and the wind, with wolves



all round below waiting for you, they can be
perfectly miserable places.

This glade in the ring of trees was evidently
a meeting-place of the wolves. More and more
kept coming in. They left guards at the foot of
the tree in which Dori and Bilbo were, and then
went snuffling about till they had smelt out every
tree that had anyone in it. These they guarded
too, while all the rest (hundreds and hundreds it
seemed) went and sat in a great circle in the
glade; and in the middle of the circle was a
great grey wolf. He spoke to them in the
dreadful language of the Wargs. Gandalf
understood it. Bilbo did not, but it sounded
terrible to him, and as if all their talk was about
cruel and wicked things, as it was. Every now
and then all the Wargs in the circle would
answer their grey chief all together, and their
dreadful clamour almost made the hobbit fall
out of his pine-tree.

I will tell you what Gandalf heard, though
Bilbo did not understand it. The Wargs and the
goblins often helped one another in wicked
deeds. Goblins do not usually venture very far
from their mountains, unless they are driven out
and are looking for new homes, or are
marching to war (which I am glad to say has not
happened for a long while). But in those days
they sometimes used to go on raids, especially
to get food or slaves to work for them. Then they
often got the Wargs to help and shared the



plunder with them. Sometimes they rode on
wolves like men do on horses. Now it seemed
that a great goblin-raid had been planned for
that very night. The Wargs had come to meet
the goblins and the goblins were late. The
reason, no doubt, was the death of the Great
Goblin, and all the excitement caused by the
dwarves and Bilbo and the wizard, for whom
they were probably still hunting.

In spite of the dangers of this far land bold
men had of late been making their way back
into it from the South, cutting down trees, and
building themselves places to live in among the
more pleasant woods in the valleys and along
the river-shores. There were many of them, and
they were brave and well-armed, and even the
Wargs dared not attack them if there were
many together, or in the bright day. But now they
had planned with the goblins’ help to come by
night upon some of the villages nearest the
mountains. If their plan had been carried out,
there would have been none left there next day;
all would have been killed except the few the
goblins kept from the wolves and carried back
as prisoners to their caves.

This was dreadful talk to listen to, not only
because of the brave woodmen and their wives
and children, but also because of the danger
which now threatened Gandalf and his friends.
The Wargs were angry and puzzled at finding
them here in their very meeting-place. They



thought they were friends of the woodmen, and
were come to spy on them, and would take
news of their plans down into the valleys, and
then the goblins and the wolves would have to
fight a terrible battle instead of capturing
prisoners and devouring people waked
suddenly from their sleep. So the Wargs had no
intention of going away and letting the people
up the trees escape, at any rate not until
morning. And long before that, they said, goblin
soldiers would be coming down from the
mountains; and goblins can climb trees, or cut
them down.

Now you can understand why Gandalf,
listening to their growling and yelping, began to
be dreadfully afraid, wizard though he was, and
to feel that they were in a very bad place, and
had not yet escaped at all. All the same he was
not going to let them have it all their own way,
though he could not do very much stuck up in a
tall tree with wolves all round on the ground
below. He gathered the huge pine-cones from
the branches of the tree. Then he set one alight
with bright blue fire, and threw it whizzing down
among the circle of the wolves. It struck one on
the back, and immediately his shaggy coat
caught fire, and he was leaping to and fro
yelping horribly. Then another came and
another, one in blue flames, one in red, another
in green. They burst on the ground in the middle
of the circle and went off in coloured sparks and



smoke. A specially large one hit the chief wolf
on the nose, and he leaped in the air ten feet,
and then rushed round and round the circle
biting and snapping even at the other wolves in
his anger and fright.

The dwarves and Bilbo shouted and
cheered. The rage of the wolves was terrible to
see, and the commotion they made filled all the
forest. Wolves are afraid of fire at all times, but
this was a most horrible and uncanny fire. If a
spark got in their coats it stuck and burned into
them, and unless they rolled over quick they
were soon all in flames. Very soon all about the
glade wolves were rolling over and over to put
out the sparks on their backs, while those that
were burning were running about howling and
setting others alight, till their own friends chased
them away and they fled off down the slopes
crying and yammering and looking for water.


"What is all this uproar in the forest tonight?”
said the Lord of the Eagles. He was sitting,
black in the moonlight, on the top of a lonely
pinnacle of rock at the eastern edge of the
mountains. “I hear wolves’ voices! Are the
goblins at mischief in the woods?”

He swept up into the air, and immediately
two of his guards from the rocks at either hand
leaped up to follow him. They circled up in the
sky and looked down upon the ring of the



Wargs, a tiny spot far far below. But eagles
have keen eyes and can see small things at a
great distance. The Lord of the Eagles of the
Misty Mountains had eyes that could look at the
sun unblinking, and could see a rabbit moving
on the ground a mile below even in the
moonlight. So though he could not see the
people in the trees, he could make out the
commotion among the wolves and see the tiny
flashes of fire, and hear the howling and yelping
come up faint from far beneath him. Also he
could see the glint of the moon on goblin spears
and helmets, as long lines of the wicked folk
crept down the hillsides from their gate and
wound into the wood.

Eagles are not kindly birds. Some are
cowardly and cruel. But the ancient race of the
northern mountains were the greatest of all
birds; they were proud and strong and noble-
hearted. They did not love goblins, or fear them.
When they took any notice of them at all (which
was seldom, for they did not eat such
creatures), they swooped on them and drove
them shrieking back to their caves, and
stopped whatever wickedness they were doing.
The goblins hated the eagles and feared them,
but could not reach their lofty seats, or drive
them from the mountains.

Tonight the Lord of the Eagles was filled
with curiosity to know what was afoot; so he
summoned many other eagles to him, and they



flew away from the mountains, and slowly
circling ever round and round they came down,
down, down towards the ring of the wolves and
the meeting-place of the goblins.

A very good thing too! Dreadful things had
been going on down there. The wolves that had
caught fire and fled into the forest had set it
alight in several places, it was high summer,
and on this eastern side of the mountains there
had been little rain for some time. Yellowing
bracken, fallen branches, deep-piled pine-
needles, and here and there dead trees, were
soon in flames. All round the clearing of the
Wargs fire was leaping. But the wolf-guards did
not leave the trees. Maddened and angry they
were leaping and howling round the trunks, and
cursing the dwarves in their horrible language,
with their tongues hanging out, and their eyes
shining as red and fierce as the flames.

Then suddenly goblins came running up
yelling. They thought a battle with the woodmen
was going on; but they soon learned what had
really happened. Some of them actually sat
down and laughed. Others waved their spears
and clashed the shafts against their shields.
Goblins are not afraid of fire, and they soon had
a plan which seemed to them most amusing.

Some got all the wolves together in a pack.
Some stacked fern and brushwood round the
tree-trunks. Others rushed round and stamped
and beat, and beat and stamped, until nearly all



the flames were put out — but they did not put
out the fire nearest to the trees where the
dwarves were. That fire they fed with leaves and
dead branches and bracken. Soon they had a
ring of smoke and flame all round the dwarves,
a ring which they kept from spreading outwards;
but it closed slowly in, till the running fire was
licking the fuel piled under the trees. Smoke
was in Bilbo’s eyes, he could feel the heat of
the flames; and through the reek he could see
the goblins dancing round and round in a circle
like people round a midsummer bonfire.
Outside the ring of dancing warriors with spears
and axes stood the wolves at a respectful
distance, watching and waiting.

He could hear the goblins beginning a
horrible song:


Fifteen birds in five fir-trees,

their feathers were fanned in a fiery

breeze!

But, funny little birds, they had no wings!

O what shall we do with the funny little
things?

Roast ’em alive, orstewthem in a pot;
fry them, boil them and eat them hot?


Then they stopped and shouted out: “Fly
away little birds! Fly away if you can! Come
down little birds, or you will get roasted in your



nests! Sing, sing little birds! Why don’t you
sing?”

“Go away! little boys!” shouted Gandalf in
answer. “It isn’t bird-nesting time. Also naughty
little boys that play with fire get punished.” He
said it to make them angry, and to show them
he was not frightened of them — though of
course he was, wizard though he was. But they
took no notice, and they went on singing.


Bum, bum tree and fern!

Shrivel and scorch! A fizzling torch
To light the night for our delight,

Ya hey!

Bake and toast ’em, fry and roast ’em!
till beards blaze, and eyes glaze;
till hair smells and skins crack,
fat melts, and bones black
in cinders lie
beneath the sky!

So dwarves shall die,
and light the night for our delight,

Ya hey!

Ya-harri-hey!

Ya hoy!


And with that Ya hoy\ the flames were
under Gandalf s tree. In a moment it spread to
the others. The bark caught fire, the lower



branches cracked.

Then Gandalf climbed to the top of his tree.
The sudden splendour flashed from his wand
like lightning, as he got ready to spring down
from on high right among the spears of the
goblins. That would have been the end of him,
though he would probably have killed many of
them as he came hurtling down like a
thunderbolt. But he never leaped.

Just at that moment the Lord of the Eagles
swept down from above, seized him in his
talons, and was gone.


There was a howl of anger and surprise from
the goblins. Loud cried the Lord of the Eagles,
to whom Gandalf had now spoken. Back swept
the great birds that were with him, and down
they came like huge black shadows. The
wolves yammered and gnashed their teeth; the
goblins yelled and stamped with rage, and flung
their heavy spears in the air in vain. Over them
swooped the eagles; the dark rush of their
beating wings smote them to the floor or drove
them far away; their talons tore at goblin faces.
Other birds flew to the tree-tops and seized the
dwarves, who were scrambling up now as far
as they ever dared to go.

Poor little Bilbo was very nearly left behind
again! He just managed to catch hold of Dori’s
legs, as Dori was borne off last of all; and up



they went together above the tumult and the
burning, Bilbo swinging in the air with his arms
nearly breaking.

Now far below the goblins and the wolves
were scattering far and wide in the woods. A
few eagles were still circling and sweeping
above the battleground. The flames about the
trees sprang suddenly up above the highest
branches. They went up in crackling fire. There
was a sudden flurry of sparks and smoke. Bilbo
had escaped only just in time!

Soon the light of the burning was faint
below, a red twinkle on the black floor; and they
were high up in the sky, rising all the time in
strong sweeping circles. Bilbo never forgot that
flight, clinging onto Dori’s ankles. He moaned
“my arms, my arms!”; but Dori groaned “my
poor legs, my poor legs!”

At the best of times heights made Bilbo
giddy. He used to turn queer if he looked over
the edge of quite a little cliff; and he had never
liked ladders, let alone trees (never having had
to escape from wolves before). So you can
imagine how his head swam now, when he
looked down between his dangling toes and
saw the dark lands opening wide underneath
him, touched here and there with the light of the
moon on a hill-side rock or a stream in the
plains.

The pale peaks of the mountains were
coming nearer, moonlit spikes of rock sticking



out of black shadows. Summer or not, it
seemed very cold. He shut his eyes and
wondered if he could hold on any longer. Then
he imagined what would happen if he did not.
He felt sick.

The flight ended only just in time for him, just
before his arms gave way. He loosed Dori’s
ankles with a gasp and fell onto the rough
platform of an eagle’s eyrie. There he lay
without speaking, and his thoughts were a
mixture of surprise at being saved from the fire,
and fear lest he fall off that narrow place into the
deep shadows on either side. He was feeling
very queer indeed in his head by this time after
the dreadful adventures of the last three days
with next to nothing to eat, and he found himself
saying aloud: “Now I know what a piece of
bacon feels like when it is suddenly picked out
of the pan on a fork and put back on the shelf!”

“No you don’t!” he heard Dori answering,
“because the bacon knows that it will get back
in the pan sooner or later; and it is to be hoped
we shan’t. Also eagles aren’t forks!”

“O no! Not a bit like storks — forks, I mean,”
said Bilbo sitting up and looking anxiously at
the eagle who was perched close by. He
wondered what other nonsense he had been
saying, and if the eagle would think it rude. You
ought not to be rude to an eagle, when you are
only the size of a hobbit, and are up in his eyrie
at night!



The eagle only sharpened his beak on a
stone and trimmed his feathers and took no
notice.

Soon another eagle flew up. “The Lord of
the Eagles bids you to bring your prisoners to
the Great Shelf,” he cried and was off again.
The other seized Dori in his claws and flew
away with him into the night leaving Bilbo all
alone. He had just strength to wonder what the
messenger had meant by ‘prisoners,’ and to
begin to think of being torn up for supper like a
rabbit, when his own turn came.

The eagle came back, seized him in his
talons by the back of his coat, and swooped off.
This time he flew only a short way. Very soon
Bilbo was laid down, trembling with fear, on a
wide shelf of rock on the mountain-side. There
was no path down on to it save by flying; and no
path down off it except by jumping over a
precipice. There he found all the others sitting
with their backs to the mountain wall. The Lord
of the Eagles also was there and was speaking
to Gandalf.

It seemed that Bilbo was not going to be
eaten after all. The wizard and the eagle-lord
appeared to know one another slightly, and
even to be on friendly terms. As a matter of fact
Gandalf, who had often been in the mountains,
had once rendered a service to the eagles and
healed their lord from an arrow-wound. So you
see ‘prisoners’ had meant ‘prisoners rescued



from the goblins’ only, and not captives of the
eagles. As Bilbo listened to the talk of Gandalf
he realized that at last they were going to
escape really and truly from the dreadful
mountains. He was discussing plans with the
Great Eagle for carrying the dwarves and
himself and Bilbo far away and setting them
down well on their journey across the plains
below.




The Misty Mountains looking West from the
Eyrie towards Goblin Gate


The Lord of the Eagles would not take them
anywhere near where men lived. “They would
shoot at us with their great bows of yew,” he
said, “for they would think we were after their
sheep. And at other times they would be right.
No! we are glad to cheat the goblins of their
sport, and glad to repay our thanks to you, but
we will not risk ourselves for dwarves in the
southward plains.”

“Very well,” said Gandalf. “Take us where
and as far as you will! We are already deeply
obliged to you. But in the meantime we are
famished with hunger.”

“I am nearly dead of it,” said Bilbo in a weak
little voice that nobody heard.

“That can perhaps be mended,” said the
Lord of the Eagles.

Later on you might have seen a bright fire
on the shelf of rock and the figures of the
dwarves round it cooking and making a fine
roasting smell. The eagles had brought up dry
boughs for fuel, and they had brought rabbits,
hares, and a small sheep. The dwarves
managed all the preparations. Bilbo was too
weak to help, and anyway he was not much
good at skinning rabbits or cutting up meat,
being used to having it delivered by the butcher



all ready to cook. Gandalf, too, was lying down
after doing his part in setting the fire going,
since Oin and Gloin had lost their tinder-boxes.
(Dwarves have never taken to matches even
yet.)

So ended the adventures of the Misty
Mountains. Soon Bilbo’s stomach was feeling
full and comfortable again, and he felt he could
sleep contentedly, though really he would have
liked a loaf and butter better than bits of meat
toasted on sticks. He slept curled up on the
hard rock more soundly than ever he had done
on his feather-bed in his own little hole at home.
But all night he dreamed of his own house and
wandered in his sleep into all his different
rooms looking for something that he could not
find nor remember what it looked like.




Chapter VII


QUEER LODGINGS


The next morning Bilbo woke up with the early
sun in his eyes. He jumped up to look at the
time and to go and put his kettle on — and found
he was not home at all. So he sat down and
wished in vain for a wash and a brush. He did
not get either, nor tea nor toast nor bacon for
his breakfast, only cold mutton and rabbit. And
after that he had to get ready for a fresh start.

This time he was allowed to climb on to an
eagle’s back and cling between his wings. The
air rushed over him and he shut his eyes. The
dwarves were crying farewells and promising to
repay the Lord of the Eagles if ever they could,
as off rose fifteen great birds from the
mountain’s side. The sun was still close to the
eastern edge of things. The morning was cool,
and mists were in the valleys and hollows and
twined here and there about the peaks and
pinnacles of the hills. Bilbo opened an eye to
peep and saw that the birds were already high


up and the world was far away, and the
mountains were falling back behind them into
the distance. He shut his eyes again and held
on tighter.

“Don’t pinch!” said his eagle. “You need not
be frightened like a rabbit, even if you look
rather like one. It is a fair morning with little
wind. What is finer than flying?”

Bilbo would have liked to say: “A warm bath
and late breakfast on the lawn afterwards;” but
he thought it better to say nothing at all, and to
let go his clutch just a tiny bit.

After a good while the eagles must have
seen the point they were making for, even from
their great height, for they began to go down
circling round in great spirals. They did this for a
long while, and at last the hobbit opened his
eyes again. The earth was much nearer, and
below them were trees that looked like oaks
and elms, and wide grass lands, and a river
running through it all. But cropping out of the
ground, right in the path of the stream which
looped itself about it, was a great rock, almost
a hill of stone, like a last outpost of the distant
mountains, or a huge piece cast miles into the
plain by some giant among giants.

Quickly now to the top of this rock the
eagles swooped one by one and set down their
passengers.

“Farewell!” they cried, “wherever you fare,



till your eyries receive you at the journey’s end!”
That is the polite thing to say among eagles.

“May the wind under your wings bear you
where the sun sails and the moon walks,”
answered Gandalf, who knew the correct reply.

And so they parted. And though the Lord of
the Eagles became in after days the King of All
Birds and wore a golden crown, and his fifteen
chieftains golden collars (made of the gold that
the dwarves gave them), Bilbo never saw them
again — except high and far off in the battle of
Five Armies. But as that comes in at the end of
this tale we will say no more about it just now.

There was a flat space on the top of the hill
of stone and a well worn path with many steps
leading down it to the river, across which a ford
of huge flat stones led to the grass-land beyond
the stream. There was a little cave (a
wholesome one with a pebbly floor) at the foot
of the steps and near the end of the stony ford.
Here the party gathered and discussed what
was to be done.

“I always meant to see you all safe (if
possible) over the mountains,” said the wizard,
“and now by good management and good luck I
have done it. Indeed we are now a good deal
further east than I ever meant to come with you,
for after all this is not my adventure. I may look
in on it again before it is all over, but in the
meanwhile I have some other pressing



business to attend to.”

The dwarves groaned and looked most
distressed, and Bilbo wept. They had begun to
think Gandalf was going to come all the way
and would always be there to help them out of
difficulties. “I am not going to disappear this
very instant,” said he. “I can give you a day or
two more. Probably I can help you out of your
present plight, and I need a little help myself.
We have no food, and no baggage, and no
ponies to ride; and you don’t know where you
are. Now I can tell you that. You are still some
miles north of the path which we should have
been following, if we had not left the mountain
pass in a hurry. Very few people live in these
parts, unless they have come here since I was
last down this way, which is some years ago.
But there is somebody that I know of, who lives
not far away. That Somebody made the steps
on the great rock — the Carrock I believe he
calls it. He does not come here often, certainly
not in the daytime, and it is no good waiting for
him. In fact it would be very dangerous. We
must go and find him; and if all goes well at our
meeting, I think I shall be off and wish you like
the eagles ‘farewell wherever you fare! ' ”

They begged him not to leave them. They
offered him dragon-gold and silver and jewels,
but he would not change his mind. “We shall
see, we shall see!” he said, “and I think I have



earned already some of your dragon-gold —
when you have got it.”


After that they stopped pleading. Then they took
off their clothes and bathed in the river, which
was shallow and clear and stony at the ford.
When they had dried in the sun, which was now
strong and warm, they were refreshed, if still
sore and a little hungry. Soon they crossed the
ford (carrying the hobbit), and then began to
march through the long green grass and down
the lines of the wide-armed oaks and the tall
elms.

“And why is it called the Carrock?” asked
Bilbo as he went along at the wizard’s side.

“He called it the Carrock, because carrock
is his word for it. He calls things like that
carrocks, and this one is the Carrock because
it is the only one near his home and he knows it
well.”

“Who calls it? Who knows it?”

“The Somebody I spoke of — a very great
person. You must all be very polite when I
introduce you. I shall introduce you slowly, two
by two, I think; and you must be careful not to
annoy him, or heaven knows what will happen.
He can be appalling when he is angry, though
he is kind enough if humoured. Still I warn you



he gets angry easily.”

The dwarves all gathered round when they
heard the wizard talking like this to Bilbo. “Is
that the person you are taking us to now?” they
asked. “Couldn’t you find someone more easy-
tempered? Hadn't you better explain it all a bit
clearer?” — and so on.

“Yes it certainly is! No I could not! And I was
explaining very carefully” answered the wizard
crossly. “If you must know more, his name is
Beorn. He is very strong, and he is a skin-
changer.”

“What! a furrier, a man that calls rabbits
conies, when he doesn’t turn their skins into
squirrels?” asked Bilbo.

“Good gracious heavens, no, no, NO, NO!”
said Gandalf. “Don’t be a fool Mr. Baggins if
you can help it; and in the name of all wonder
don’t mention the word furrier again as long as
you are within a hundred miles of his house, nor
rug, cape, tippet, muff, nor any other such
unfortunate word! He is a skin-changer. He
changes his skin: sometimes he is a huge
black bear, sometimes he is a great strong
black-haired man with huge arms and a great
beard. I cannot tell you much more, though that
ought to be enough. Some say that he is a bear
descended from the great and ancient bears of
the mountains that lived there before the giants
came. Others say that he is a man descended



from the first men who lived before Smaug or
the other dragons came into this part of the
world, and before the goblins came into the hills
out of the North. I cannot say, though I fancy the
last is the true tale. He is not the sort of person
to ask questions of.

“At any rate he is under no enchantment but
his own. He lives in an oak-wood and has a
great wooden house; and as a man he keeps
cattle and horses which are nearly as
marvellous as himself. They work for him and
talk to him. He does not eat them; neither does
he hunt or eat wild animals. He keeps hives and
hives of great fierce bees, and lives most on
cream and honey. As a bear he ranges far and
wide. I once saw him sitting all alone on the top
of the Carrock at night watching the moon
sinking towards the Misty Mountains, and I
heard him growl in the tongue of bears: The
day will come when they will perish and I shall
go back!’ That is why I believe he once came
from the mountains himself.”


Bilbo and the dwarves had now plenty to think
about, and they asked no more questions. They
still had a long way to walk before them. Up
slope and down dale they plodded. It grew very
hot. Sometimes they rested under the trees,
and then Bilbo felt so hungry that he would have



eaten acorns, if any had been ripe enough yet
to have fallen to the ground.

It was the middle of the afternoon before
they noticed that great patches of flowers had
begun to spring up, all the same kinds growing
together as if they had been planted. Especially
there was clover, waving patches of cockscomb
clover, and purple clover, and wide stretches of
short white sweet honey-smelling clover. There
was a buzzing and a whirring and a droning in
the air. Bees were busy everywhere. And such
bees! Bilbo had never seen anything like them.

“If one was to sting me,” he thought, “I
should swell up as big again as I am!”

They were bigger than hornets. The drones
were bigger than your thumb, a good deal, and
the bands of yellow on their deep black bodies
shone like fiery gold.

“We are getting near,” said Gandalf. “We
are on the edge of his bee-pastures.”


After a while they came to a belt of tall and very
ancient oaks, and beyond these to a high thorn-
hedge through which you could neither see nor
scramble.

“You had better wait here,” said the wizard
to the dwarves; “and when I call or whistle begin
to come after me — you will see the way I go —



but only in pairs, mind, about five minutes
between each pair of you. Bombur is fattest and
will do for two, he had better come alone and
last. Come on Mr. Baggins! There is a gate
somewhere round this way.” And with that he
went off along the hedge taking the frightened
hobbit with him.

They soon came to a wooden gate, high
and broad, beyond which they could see
gardens and a cluster of low wooden buildings,
some thatched and made of unshaped logs:
barns, stables, sheds, and a long low wooden
house. Inside on the southward side of the great
hedge were rows and rows of hives with bell-
shaped tops made of straw. The noise of the
giant bees flying to and fro and crawling in and
out filled all the air.

The wizard and the hobbit pushed open the
heavy creaking gate and went down a wide
track towards the house. Some horses, very
sleek and well-groomed, trotted up across the
grass and looked at them intently with very
intelligent faces; then off they galloped to the
buildings.

“They have gone to tell him of the arrival of
strangers,” said Gandalf.

Soon they reached a courtyard, three walls
of which were formed by the wooden house and
its two long wings. In the middle there was lying
a great oak-trunk with many lopped branches



beside it. Standing near was a huge man with a
thick black beard and hair, and great bare arms
and legs with knotted muscles. He was clothed
in a tunic of wool down to his knees, and was
leaning on a large axe. The horses were
standing by him with their noses at his shoulder.

“Ugh! here they are!” he said to the horses.
“They don’t look dangerous. You can be off!” He
laughed a great rolling laugh, put down his axe
and came forward.

“Who are you and what do you want?” he
asked gruffly, standing in front of them and
towering tall above Gandalf. As for Bilbo he
could easily have trotted through his legs
without ducking his head to miss the fringe of
the man’s brown tunic.

“I am Gandalf,” said the wizard.

“Never heard of him,” growled the man.
“And what’s this little fellow?” he said, stooping
down to frown at the hobbit with his bushy black
eyebrows.

“That is Mr. Baggins, a hobbit of good
family and unimpeachable reputation,” said
Gandalf. Bilbo bowed. He had no hat to take
off, and was painfully conscious of his many
missing buttons. “I am a wizard,” continued
Gandalf. “I have heard of you, if you have not
heard of me; but perhaps you have heard of my
good cousin Radagast who lives near the
Southern borders of Mirkwood?”



“Yes; not a bad fellow as wizards go, I
believe. I used to see him now and again,” said
Beorn. “Well, now I know who you are, or who
you say you are. What do you want?”

“To tell you the truth, we have lost our
luggage and nearly lost our way, and are rather
in need of help, or at least of advice. I may say
we have had rather a bad time with goblins in
the mountains.”

“Goblins?” said the big man less gruffly. “O
ho, so you’ve been having trouble with them
have you? What did you go near them for?”

“We did not mean to. They surprised us at
night in a pass which we had to cross; we were
coming out of the Lands over West into these
countries — it is a long tale.”

“Then you had better come inside and tell
me some of it, if it won’t take all day,” said the
man leading the way through a dark door that
opened out of the courtyard into the house.

Following him they found themselves in a
wide hall with a fire-place in the middle. Though
it was summer there was a wood-fire burning
and the smoke was rising to the blackened
rafters in search of the way out through an
opening in the roof. They passed through this
dim hall, lit only by the fire and the hole above it,
and came through another smaller door into a
sort of veranda propped on wooden posts
made of single tree-trunks. It faced south and




was still warm and filled with the light of the
westering sun which slanted into it, and fell
golden on the garden full of flowers that came
right up to the steps.




foRo'smi


Here they sat on wooden benches while
Gandalf began his tale, and Bilbo swung his
dangling legs and looked at the flowers in the
garden, wondering what their names could be,
as he had never seen half of them before.

“I was coming over the mountains with a
friend or two. . .” said the wizard.

“Or two? I can only see one, and a little one
at that,” said Beorn.

“Well to tell you the truth, I did not like to
bother you with a lot of us, until I found out if you
were busy. I will give a call, if I may.”

“Go on, call away!”

So Gandalf gave a long shrill whistle, and
presently Thorin and Dori came round the
house by the garden path and stood bowing low
before them.

“One or three you meant, I see!” said Beorn.
“But these aren’t hobbits, they are dwarves!”

“Thorin Oakenshield, at your service! Dori
at your service!” said the two dwarves bowing
again.

“I don’t need your service, thank you,” said


Beorn, “but I expect you need mine. I am not
over fond of dwarves; but if it is true you are
Thorin (son of Thrain, son of Thror, I believe),
and that your companion is respectable, and
that you are enemies of goblins and are not up
to any mischief in my lands — what are you up
to, by the way?”

“They are on their way to visit the land of
their fathers, away east beyond Mirkwood,” put
in Gandalf, “and it is entirely an accident that we
are in your lands at all. We were crossing by the
High Pass that should have brought us to the
road that lies to the south of your country, when
we were attacked by the evil goblins — as I was
about to tell you.”

“Go on telling, then!” said Beorn, who was
never very polite.

“There was a terrible storm; the stone-
giants were out hurling rocks, and at the head of
the pass we took refuge in a cave, the hobbit
and I and several of our companions. . .”

“Do you call two several?”

“Well, no. As a matter of fact there were
more than two.”

“Where are they? Killed, eaten, gone
home?”

“Well, no. They don’t seem all to have come
when I whistled. Shy, I expect. You see, we are
very much afraid that we are rather a lot for you
to entertain.”



“Go on, whistle again! lam in for a party, it
seems, and one or two more won’t make much
difference,” growled Beorn.

Gandalf whistled again; but Nori and Ori
were there almost before he had stopped, for, if
you remember, Gandalf had told them to come
in pairs every five minutes.

“Hullo!” said Beorn. “You came pretty quick
— where were you hiding? Come on my jack-in-
the-boxes!”

“Nori at your service, Ori at. . .” they began;
but Beorn interrupted them.

“Thank you! When I want your help I will ask
for it. Sit down, and let’s get on with this tale, or
it will be supper-time before it is ended.”

“As soon as we were asleep,” went on
Gandalf, “a crack at the back of the cave
opened; goblins came out and grabbed the
hobbit and the dwarves and our troop of ponies

“Troop of ponies? What were you — a
travelling circus? Or were you carrying lots of
goods? Or do you always call six a troop?”

“O no! As a matter of fact there were more
than six ponies, for there were more than six of
us — and well, here are two more!” Just at that
moment Balin and Dwalin appeared and
bowed so low that their beards swept the stone
floor. The big man was frowning at first, but they
did their best to be frightfully polite, and kept on



nodding and bending and bowing and waving
their hoods before their knees (in proper dwarf-
fashion), till he stopped frowning and burst into
a chuckling laugh: they looked so comical.

“Troop, was right,” he said. “A fine comic
one. Come in my merry men, and what are your
names? I don’t want your service just now, only
your names; and then sit down and stop
wagging!”

“Balin and Dwalin,” they said not daring to
be offended, and sat flop on the floor looking
rather surprised.

“Now go on again!” said Beorn to the
wizard.

“Where was I? O yes — I was not grabbed. I
killed a goblin or two with a flash — ”

“Good!” growled Beorn. “It is some good
being a wizard, then.”

“ — and slipped inside the crack before it
closed. I followed down into the main hall, which
was crowded with goblins. The Great Goblin
was there with thirty or forty armed guards. I
thought to myself ‘even if they were not all
chained together, what can a dozen do against
so many?’”

“A dozen! That’s the first time I've heard
eight called a dozen. Or have you still got some
more jacks that haven’t yet come out of their
boxes?”

“Well, yes, there seem to be a couple more



here now — Fili and Kili, I believe,” said Gandalf,
as these two now appeared and stood smiling
and bowing.

“That’s enough!” said Beorn. “Sit down and
be quiet! Now go on, Gandalf!”

So Gandalf went on with the tale, until he
came to the fight in the dark, the discovery of
the lower gate, and their horror when they found
that Mr. Baggins had been mislaid. “We
counted ourselves and found that there was no
hobbit. There were only fourteen of us left!”

“Fourteen! That’s the first time I’ve heard
one from ten leave fourteen. You mean nine, or
else you haven’t told me yet all the names of
your party.”

“Well, of course you haven’t seen Oin and
Gloin yet. And, bless me! here they are. I hope
you will forgive them for bothering you.”

“O let ’em all come! Hurry up! Come along,
you two, and sit down! But look here, Gandalf,
even now we have only got yourself and ten
dwarves and the hobbit that was lost. That only
makes eleven (plus one mislaid) and not
fourteen, unless wizards count differently to
other people. But now please get on with the
tale.” Beorn did not show it more than he could
help, but really he had begun to get very
interested. You see, in the old days he had
known the very part of the mountains that
Gandalf was describing. He nodded and he



growled, when he heard of the hobbit’s
reappearance and of their scramble down the
stone-slide and of the wolf-ring in the woods.

When Gandalf came to their climbing into
trees with the wolves all underneath, he got up
and strode about and muttered: “I wish I had
been there! I would have given them more than
fireworks!”

“Well,” said Gandalf very glad to see that
his tale was making a good impression, “I did
the best I could. There we were with the wolves
going mad underneath us and the forest
beginning to blaze in places, when the goblins
came down from the hills and discovered us.
They yelled with delight and sang songs making
fun of us. Fifteen birds in live fir-trees . .

“Good heavens!” growled Beorn. “Don’t
pretend that goblins can’t count. They can.
Twelve isn't fifteen and they know it.”

“And so do I. There were Bifur and Bofur as
well. I haven’t ventured to introduce them
before, but here they are.”

In came Bifur and Bofur. “And me!” gasped
Bombur puffing up behind. He was fat, and also
angry at being left till last. He refused to wait
five minutes, and followed immediately after the
other two.

“Well, now there are fifteen of you; and
since goblins can count, I suppose that is all
that there were up the trees. Now perhaps we



can finish this story without any more
interruptions.” Mr. Baggins saw then how clever
Gandalf had been. The interruptions had really
made Beorn more interested in the story, and
the story had kept him from sending the
dwarves off at once like suspicious beggars.
He never invited people into his house, if he
could help it. He had very few friends and they
lived a good way away; and he never invited
more than a couple of these to his house at a
time. Now he had got fifteen strangers sitting in
his porch!

By the time the wizard had finished his tale
and had told of the eagles’ rescue and of how
they had all been brought to the Carrock, the
sun had fallen behind the peaks of the Misty
Mountains and the shadows were long in
Beorn’s garden.

“Avery good tale!” said he. “The best I have
heard for a long while. If all beggars could tell
such a good one, they might find me kinder.
You may be making it all up, of course, but you
deserve a supper for the story all the same.
Let’s have something to eat!”

“Yes please!” they all said together. “Thank
you very much!”


Inside the hall it was now quite dark. Beorn
clapped his hands, and in trotted four beautiful



white ponies and several large long-bodied
grey dogs. Beorn said something to them in a
queer language like animal noises turned into
talk. They went out again and soon came back
carrying torches in their mouths, which they lit at
the fire and stuck in low brackets on the pillars
of the hall about the central hearth. The dogs
could stand on their hind-legs when they
wished, and carry things with their fore-feet.
Quickly they got out boards and trestles from
the side walls and set them up near the fire.

Then baa — baa — baa! was heard, and in
came some snow-white sheep led by a large
coal-black ram. One bore a white cloth
embroidered at the edges with figures of
animals; others bore on their broad backs trays
with bowls and platters and knives and wooden
spoons, which the dogs took and quickly laid on
the trestle-tables. These were very low, low
enough even for Bilbo to sit at comfortably.
Beside them a pony pushed two low-seated
benches with wide rush-bottoms and little short
thick legs for Gandalf and Thorin, while at the
far end he put Beorn’s big black chair of the
same sort (in which he sat with his great legs
stuck far out under the table). These were all the
chairs he had in his hall, and he probably had
them low like the tables for the convenience of
the wonderful animals that waited on him. What
did the rest sit on? They were not forgotten. The



other ponies came in rolling round drum-
shaped sections of logs, smoothed and
polished, and low enough even for Bilbo; so
soon they were all seated at Beorn’s table, and
the hall had not seen such a gathering for many
a year.

There they had a supper, or a dinner, such
as they had not had since they left the Last
Homely House in the West and said good-bye
to Elrond. The light of the torches and the fire
flickered about them, and on the table were two
tall red beeswax candles. All the time they ate,
Beorn in his deep rolling voice told tales of the
wild lands on this side of the mountains, and
especially of the dark and dangerous wood,
that lay outstretched far to North and South a
day’s ride before them, barring their way to the
East, the terrible forest of Mirkwood.