
The dwarves listened and shook their
beards, for they knew that they must soon
venture into that forest and that after the
mountains it was the worst of the perils they had
to pass before they came to the dragon’s
stronghold. When dinner was over they began
to tell tales of their own, but Beorn seemed to
be growing drowsy and paid little heed to them.
They spoke most of gold and silver and jewels
and the making of things by smith-craft, and
Beorn did not appear to care for such things:
there were no things of gold or silver in his hall,



and few save the knives were made of metal at
all.

They sat long at the table with their wooden
drinking-bowls filled with mead. The dark night
came on outside. The fires in the middle of the
hall were built with fresh logs and the torches
were put out, and still they sat in the light of the
dancing flames with the pillars of the house
standing tall behind them, and dark at the top
like trees of the forest. Whether it was magic or
not, it seemed to Bilbo that he heard a sound
like wind in the branches stirring in the rafters,
and the hoot of owls. Soon he began to nod
with sleep and the voices seemed to grow far
away, until he woke with a start.

The great door had creaked and slammed.
Beorn was gone. The dwarves were sitting
cross-legged on the floor round the fire, and
presently they began to sing. Some of the
verses were like this, but there were many
more, and their singing went on for a long while:


The wind was on the withered heath,
but in the forest stirred no leaf:
there shadows lay by night and day,
and dark things silent crept beneath.



The wind came down from mountains
cold,

and like a tide it roared and rolled;
the branches groaned, the forest moaned,
and leaves were laid upon the mould.


The wind went on from West to East;
all movement in the forest ceased,
but shrill and harsh across the marsh
its whistling voices were released.


The grasses hissed, their tassels bent,
the reeds were rattling — on it went
o’er shaken pool under heavens cool
where racing clouds were tom and rent.


It passed the lonely Mountain bare
and swept above the dragon’s lair:
there black and dark lay boulders stark
and flying smoke was in the air.



It left the world and took its flight
over the wide seas of the night.

The moon set sail upon the gale,
and stars were fanned to leaping light.


Bilbo began to nod again. Suddenly up
stood Gandalf.

“It is time for us to sleep,’’ he said, “ — for us,
but not I think for Beorn. In this hall we can rest
sound and safe, but I warn you all not to forget
what Beorn said before he left us: you must not
stray outside until the sun is up, on your peril.”

Bilbo found that beds had already been laid
at the side of the hall, on a sort of raised
platform between the pillars and the outer wall.
For him there was a little mattress of straw and
woollen blankets. He snuggled into them very
gladly, summertime though it was. The fire
burned low and he fell asleep. Yet in the night
he woke: the fire had now sunk to a few
embers; the dwarves and Gandalf were all
asleep, to judge by their breathing; a splash of
white on the floor came from the high moon,
which was peering down through the smoke-
hole in the roof.

There was a growling sound outside, and a
noise as of some great animal scuffling at the
door. Bilbo wondered what it was, and whether
it could be Beorn in enchanted shape, and if he



would come in as a bear and kill them. He
dived under the blankets and hid his head, and
fell asleep again at last in spite of his fears.


It was full morning when he awoke. One of the
dwarves had fallen over him in the shadows
where he lay, and had rolled down with a bump
from the platform on to the floor. It was Bofur,
and he was grumbling about it, when Bilbo
opened his eyes.

“Get up lazybones,” he said, “or there will be
no breakfast left for you.”

Up jumped Bilbo. “Breakfast!” he cried.
“Where is breakfast?”

“Mostly inside us,” answered the other
dwarves who were moving about the hall; “but
what is left is out on the veranda. We have been
about looking for Beorn ever since the sun got
up; but there is no sign of him anywhere, though
we found breakfast laid as soon as we went
out.”

“Where is Gandalf?” asked Bilbo, moving
off to find something to eat as quick as he
could.

“O! out and about somewhere,” they told
him. But he saw no sign of the wizard all that
day until the evening. Just before sunset he
walked into the hall, where the hobbit and the
dwarves were having supper, waited on by



Beorn’s wonderful animals, as they had been all
day. Of Beorn they had seen and heard nothing
since the night before, and they were getting
puzzled.

“Where is our host, and where have you
been all day yourself?” they all cried.

“One question at a time — and none till after
supper! I haven’t had a bite since breakfast.”

At last Gandalf pushed away his plate and
jug — he had eaten two whole loaves (with
masses of butter and honey and clotted cream)
and drunk at least a quart of mead — and he
took out his pipe. “I will answer the second
question first,” he said, “ — but bless me! this is
a splendid place for smoke rings!” Indeed for a
long time they could get nothing more out of
him, he was so busy sending smoke rings
dodging round the pillars of the hall, changing
them into all sorts of different shapes and
colours, and setting them at last chasing one
another out of the hole in the roof. They must
have looked very queer from outside, popping
out into the air one after another, green, blue,
red, silver-grey, yellow, white; big ones, little
ones; little ones dodging through big ones and
joining into figure-eights, and going off like a
flock of birds into the distance.

“I have been picking out bear-tracks,” he
said at last. “There must have been a regular
bears’ meeting outside here last night. I soon



saw that Beorn could not have made them all:
there were far too many of them, and they were
of various sizes too. I should say there were
little bears, large bears, ordinary bears, and
gigantic big bears, all dancing outside from
dark to nearly dawn. They came from almost
every direction, except from the west over the
river, from the Mountains. In that direction only
one set of footprints led — none coming, only
ones going away from here. I followed these as
far as the Carrock. There they disappeared into
the river, but the water was too deep and strong
beyond the rock for me to cross. It is easy
enough, as you remember, to get from this bank
to the Carrock by the ford, but on the other side
is a cliff standing up from a swirling channel. I
had to walk miles before I found a place where
the river was wide and shallow enough for me
to wade and swim, and then miles back again
to pick up the tracks again. By that time it was
too late for me to follow them far. They went
straight off in the direction of the pine-woods on
the east side of the Misty Mountains, where we
had our pleasant little party with the Wargs the
night before last. And now I think I have
answered your first question, too,” ended
Gandalf, and he sat a long while silent.

Bilbo thought he knew what the wizard
meant. “What shall we do,” he cried, “if he leads
all the Wargs and the goblins down here? We



shall all be caught and killed! I thought you said
he was not a friend of theirs.”

“So I did. And don’t be silly! You had better
go to bed, your wits are sleepy.”

The hobbit felt quite crushed, and as there
seemed nothing else to do he did go to bed;
and while the dwarves were still singing songs
he dropped asleep, still puzzling his little head
about Beorn, till he dreamed a dream of
hundreds of black bears dancing slow heavy
dances round and round in the moonlight in the
courtyard. Then he woke up when everyone
else was asleep, and he heard the same
scraping, scuffling, snuffling, and growling as
before.

Next morning they were all wakened by
Beorn himself. “So here you all are still!” he
said. He picked up the hobbit and laughed: “Not
eaten up by Wargs or goblins or wicked bears
yet I see”; and he poked Mr. Baggins’ waistcoat
most disrespectfully. “Little bunny is getting nice
and fat again on bread and honey,” he
chuckled. “Come and have some more!”

So they all went to breakfast with him.
Beorn was most jolly for a change; indeed he
seemed to be in a splendidly good humour and
set them all laughing with his funny stories; nor
did they have to wonder long where he had
been or why he was so nice to them, for he told
them himself. He had been over the river and



right back up into the mountains — from which
you can guess that he could travel quickly, in
bear’s shape at any rate. From the burnt wolf-
glade he had soon found out that part of their
story was true; but he had found more than that:
he had caught a Warg and a goblin wandering
in the woods. From these he had got news: the
goblin patrols were still hunting with Wargs for
the dwarves, and they were fiercely angry
because of the death of the Great Goblin, and
also because of the burning of the chief wolfs
nose and the death from the wizard’s fire of
many of his chief servants. So much they told
him when he forced them, but he guessed there
was more wickedness than this afoot, and that
a great raid of the whole goblin army with their
wolf-allies into the lands shadowed by the
mountains might soon be made to find the
dwarves, or to take vengeance on the men and
creatures that lived there, and who they thought
must be sheltering them.

“It was a good story, that of yours,” said
Beorn, “but I like it still better now I am sure it is
true. You must forgive my not taking your word.
If you lived near the edge of Mirkwood, you
would take the word of no one that you did not
know as well as your brother or better. As it is, I
can only say that I have hurried home as fast as
I could to see that you were safe, and to offer
you any help that I can. I shall think more kindly



of dwarves after this. Killed the Great Goblin,
killed the Great Goblin!” he chuckled fiercely to
himself.

“What did you do with the goblin and the
Warg?” asked Bilbo suddenly.

“Come and see!” said Beorn, and they
followed round the house. A goblin’s head was
stuck outside the gate and a warg-skin was
nailed to a tree just beyond. Beorn was a fierce
enemy. But now he was their friend, and
Gandalf thought it wise to tell him their whole
story and the reason of their journey, so that
they could get the most help he could offer.

This is what he promised to do for them. He
would provide ponies for each of them, and a
horse for Gandalf, for their journey to the forest,
and he would lade them with food to last them
for weeks with care, and packed so as to be as
easy as possible to carry — nuts, flour, sealed
jars of dried fruits, and red earthenware pots of
honey, and twice-baked cakes that would keep
good a long time, and on a little of which they
could march far. The making of these was one
of his secrets; but honey was in them, as in
most of his foods, and they were good to eat,
though they made one thirsty. Water, he said,
they would not need to carry this side of the
forest, for there were streams and springs
along the road. “But your way through Mirkwood
is dark, dangerous and difficult,” he said.



“Water is not easy to find there, nor food. The
time is not yet come for nuts (though it may be
past and gone indeed before you get to the
other side), and nuts are about all that grows
there fit for food; in there the wild things are
dark, queer, and savage. I will provide you with
skins for carrying water, and I will give you
some bows and arrows. But I doubt very much
whether anything you find in Mirkwood will be
wholesome to eat or to drink. There is one
stream there, I know, black and strong which
crosses the path. That you should neither drink
of, nor bathe in; for I have heard that it carries
enchantment and a great drowsiness and
forgetfulness. And in the dim shadows of that
place I don’t think you will shoot anything,
wholesome or unwholesome, without straying
from the path. That you MUST NOT do, for any
reason.

“That is all the advice I can give you.
Beyond the edge of the forest I cannot help you
much; you must depend on your luck and your
courage and the food I send with you. At the
gate of the forest I must ask you to send back
my horse and my ponies. But I wish you all
speed, and my house is open to you, if ever you
come back this way again.’’


They thanked him, of course, with many bows



and sweepings of their hoods and with many an
“at your service, O master of the wide wooden
halls!” But their spirits sank at his grave words,
and they all felt that the adventure was far more
dangerous than they had thought, while all the
time, even if they passed all the perils of the
road, the dragon was waiting at the end.

All that morning they were busy with
preparations. Soon after midday they ate with
Beorn for the last time, and after the meal they
mounted the steeds he was lending them, and
bidding him many farewells they rode off
through his gate at a good pace.

As soon as they left his high hedges at the
east of his fenced lands they turned north and
then bore to the north-west. By his advice they
were no longer making for the main forest-road
to the south of his land. Had they followed the
pass, their path would have led them down a
stream from the mountains that joined the great
river miles south of the Carrock. At that point
there was a deep ford which they might have
passed, if they had still had their ponies, and
beyond that a track led to the skirts of the wood
and to the entrance of the old forest road. But
Beorn had warned them that that way was now
often used by the goblins, while the forest-road
itself, he had heard, was overgrown and
disused at the eastern end and led to
impassable marshes where the paths had long



been lost. Its eastern opening had also always
been far to the south of the Lonely Mountain,
and would have left them still with a long and
difficult northward march when they got to the
other side. North of the Carrock the edge of
Mirkwood drew closer to the borders of the
Great River, and though here the Mountains too
drew down nearer, Beorn advised them to take
this way; for at a place a few days’ ride due
north of the Carrock was the gate of a little-
known pathway through Mirkwood that led
almost straight towards the Lonely Mountain.

“The goblins,” Beorn had said, “will not dare
to cross the Great River for a hundred miles
north of the Carrock nor to come near my house
— it is well protected at night! — but I should ride
fast; for if they make their raid soon they will
cross the river to the south and scour all the
edge of the forest so as to cut you off, and
Wargs run swifter than ponies. Still you are
safer going north, even though you seem to be
going back nearer to their strongholds; for that
is what they will least expect, and they will have
the longer ride to catch you. Be off now as quick
as you may!”

That is why they were now riding in silence,
galloping wherever the ground was grassy and
smooth, with the mountains dark on their left,
and in the distance the line of the river with its
trees drawing ever closer. The sun had only just



turned west when they started, and till evening it
lay golden on the land about them. It was
difficult to think of pursuing goblins behind, and
when they had put many miles between them
and Beorn’s house they began to talk and to
sing again and to forget the dark forest-path
that lay in front. But in the evening when the
dusk came on and the peaks of the mountains
glowered against the sunset they made a camp
and set a guard, and most of them slept
uneasily with dreams in which there came the
howl of hunting wolves and the cries of goblins.

Still the next morning dawned bright and fair
again. There was an autumn-like mist white
upon the ground and the air was chill, but soon
the sun rose red in the East and the mists
vanished, and while the shadows were still long
they were off again. So they rode now for two
more days, and all the while they saw nothing
save grass and flowers and birds and scattered
trees, and occasionally small herds of red deer
browsing or sitting at noon in the shade.
Sometimes Bilbo saw the horns of the harts
sticking up out of the long grass, and at first he
thought they were the dead branches of trees.
That third evening they were so eager to press
on, for Beorn had said that they should reach
the forest-gate early on the fourth-day, that they
rode still forward after dusk and into the night
beneath the moon. As the light faded Bilbo



thought he saw away to the right, or to the left,
the shadowy form of a great bear prowling
along in the same direction. But if he dared to
mention it to Gandalf, the wizard only said:
“Hush! Take no notice!”

Next day they started before dawn, though
their night had been short. As soon as it was
light they could see the forest coming as it were
to meet them, or waiting for them like a black
and frowning wall before them. The land began
to slope up and up, and it seemed to the hobbit
that a silence began to draw in upon them.
Birds began to sing less. There were no more
deer; not even rabbits were to be seen. By the
afternoon they had reached the eaves of
Mirkwood, and were resting almost beneath the
great overhanging boughs of its outer trees.
Their trunks were huge and gnarled, their
branches twisted, their leaves were dark and
long. Ivy grew on them and trailed along the
ground.

“Well, here is Mirkwood!” said Gandalf.
“The greatest of the forests of the Northern
world. I hope you like the look of it. Now you
must send back these excellent ponies you
have borrowed.”

The dwarves were inclined to grumble at
this, but the wizard told them they were fools.
“Beorn is not as far off as you seem to think,
and you had better keep your promises anyway,



for he is a bad enemy. Mr. Baggins’ eyes are
sharper than yours, if you have not seen each
night after dark a great bear going along with us
or sitting far off in the moon watching our
camps. Not only to guard you and guide you,
but to keep an eye on the ponies too. Beorn
may be your friend, but he loves his animals as
his children. You do not guess what kindness he
has shown you in letting dwarves ride them so
far and so fast, nor what would happen to you, if
you tried to take them into the forest.”

“What about the horse, then?” said Thorin.
“You don’t mention sending that back.”

“I don’t, because I am not sending it.”

“What about your promise then?”

“I will look after that. I am not sending the
horse back, I am riding it!”

Then they knew that Gandalf was going to
leave them at the very edge of Mirkwood, and
they were in despair. But nothing they could say
would change his mind.

“Now we had this all out before, when we
landed on the Carrock,” he said. “It is no use
arguing. I have, as I told you, some pressing
business away south; and I am already late
through bothering with you people. We may
meet again before all is over, and then again of
course we may not. That depends on your luck
and on your courage and sense; and I am
sending Mr. Baggins with you. I have told you



before that he has more about him than you
guess, and you will find that out before long. So
cheer up Bilbo and don’t look so glum. Cheer
up Thorin and Company! This is your expedition
after all. Think of the treasure at the end, and
forget the forest and the dragon, at any rate until
tomorrow morning!”

When tomorrow morning came he still said
the same. So now there was nothing left to do
but to fill their water-skins at a clear spring they
found close to the forest-gate, and unpack the
ponies. They distributed the packages as fairly
as they could, though Bilbo thought his lot was
wearisomely heavy, and did not at all like the
idea of trudging for miles and miles with all that
on his back.

“Don’t you worry!” said Thorin. “It will get
lighter all too soon. Before long I expect we
shall all wish our packs heavier, when the food
begins to run short.”

Then at last they said good-bye to their
ponies and turned their heads for home. Off
they trotted gaily, seeming very glad to put their
tails towards the shadow of Mirkwood. As they
went away Bilbo could have sworn that a thing
like a bear left the shadow of the trees and
shambled off quickly after them.

Now Gandalf too said farewell. Bilbo sat on
the ground feeling very unhappy and wishing he
was beside the wizard on his tall horse. He had



gone just inside the forest after breakfast (a
very poor one), and it had seemed as dark in
there in the morning as at night, and very secret:
“a sort of watching and waiting feeling,” he said
to himself.

“Good-bye!” said Gandalf to Thorin. “And
goodbye to you all, good-bye! Straight through
the forest is your way now. Don’t stray off the
track! — if you do, it is a thousand to one you will
never find it again and never get out of
Mirkwood; and then I don’t suppose I, or any
one else, will ever see you again.”

“Do we really have to go through?” groaned
the hobbit.

“Yes, you do!” said the wizard, “if you want
to get to the other side. You must either go
through or give up your quest. And I am not
going to allow you to back out now, Mr.
Baggins. I am ashamed of you for thinking of it.
You have got to look after all these dwarves for
me,” he laughed.

“No! no!” said Bilbo. “I didn’t mean that. I
meant, is there no way round?”

“There is, if you care to go two hundred
miles or so out of your way north, and twice that
south. But you wouldn’t get a safe path even
then. There are no safe paths in this part of the
world. Remember you are over the Edge of the
Wild now, and in for all sorts of fun wherever you
go. Before you could get round Mirkwood in the



North you would be right among the slopes of
the Grey Mountains, and they are simply stiff
with goblins, hobgoblins, and ores of the worst
description. Before you could get round it in the
South, you would get into the land of the
Necromancer; and even you, Bilbo, won’t need
me to tell you tales of that black sorcerer. I don’t
advise you to go anywhere near the places
overlooked by his dark tower! Stick to the
forest-track, keep your spirits up, hope for the
best, and with a tremendous slice of luck you
may come out one day and see the Long
Marshes lying below you, and beyond them,
high in the East, the Lonely Mountain where
dear old Smaug lives, though I hope he is not
expecting you.”

“Very comforting you are to be sure,”
growled Thorin. “Good-bye! If you won’t come
with us, you had better get off without any more
talk!”

“Good-bye then, and really good-bye!” said
Gandalf, and he turned his horse and rode
down into the West. But he could not resist the
temptation to have the last word. Before he had
passed quite out of hearing he turned and put
his hands to his mouth and called to them. They
heard his voice come faintly: “Good-bye! Be
good, take care of yourselves — and DON’T
LEAVE THE PATH!”

Then he galloped away and was soon lost



to sight. “O good-bye and go away!” grunted the
dwarves, all the more angry because they were
really filled with dismay at losing him. Now
began the most dangerous part of all the
journey. They each shouldered the heavy pack
and the water-skin which was their share, and
turned from the light that lay on the lands
outside and plunged into the forest.




Chapter VIII


FLIES AND SPIDERS


They walked in single file. The entrance to the
path was like a sort of arch leading into a
gloomy tunnel made by two great trees that
leant together, too old and strangled with ivy
and hung with lichen to bear more than a few
blackened leaves. The path itself was narrow
and wound in and out among the trunks. Soon
the light at the gate was like a little bright hole
far behind, and the quiet was so deep that their
feet seemed to thump along while all the trees
leaned over them and listened.

As their eyes became used to the dimness
they could see a little way to either side in a sort
of darkened green glimmer. Occasionally a
slender beam of sun that had the luck to slip in
through some opening in the leaves far above,
and still more luck in not being caught in the
tangled boughs and matted twigs beneath,
stabbed down thin and bright before them. But


this was seldom, and it soon ceased altogether.

There were black squirrels in the wood. As
Bilbo’s sharp inquisitive eyes got used to
seeing things he could catch glimpses of them
whisking off the path and scuttling behind tree-
trunks. There were queer noises too, grunts,
scufflings, and hurryings in the undergrowth, and
among the leaves that lay piled endlessly thick
in places on the forest-floor; but what made the
noises he could not see. The nastiest things
they saw were the cobwebs: dark dense
cobwebs with threads extraordinarily thick,
often stretched from tree to tree, or tangled in
the lower branches on either side of them.
There were none stretched across the path, but
whether because some magic kept it clear, or
for what other reason they could not guess.

It was not long before they grew to hate the
forest as heartily as they had hated the tunnels
of the goblins, and it seemed to offer even less
hope of any ending. But they had to go on and
on, long after they were sick for a sight of the
sun and of the sky, and longed for the feel of
wind on their faces. There was no movement of
air down under the forest-roof, and it was
everlastingly still and dark and stuffy. Even the
dwarves felt it, who were used to tunnelling, and
lived at times for long whiles without the light of
the sun; but the hobbit, who liked holes to make



a house in but not to spend summer days in, felt
that he was being slowly suffocated.

The nights were the worst. It then became
pitch-dark — not what you call pitch-dark, but
really pitch: so black that you really could see
nothing. Bilbo tried flapping his hand in front of
his nose, but he could not see it at all. Well,
perhaps it is not true to say that they could see
nothing: they could see eyes. They slept all
closely huddled together, and took it in turns to
watch; and when it was Bilbo’s turn he would
see gleams in the darkness round them, and
sometimes pairs of yellow or red or green eyes
would stare at him from a little distance, and
then slowly fade and disappear and slowly
shine out again in another place. And
sometimes they would gleam down from the
branches just above him; and that was most
terrifying. But the eyes that he liked the least
were horrible pale bulbous sort of eyes. “Insect
eyes,” he thought, “not animal eyes, only they
are much too big.”

Although it was not yet very cold, they tried
lighting watch-fires at night, but they soon gave
that up. It seemed to bring hundreds and
hundreds of eyes all round them, though the
creatures, whatever they were, were careful
never to let their bodies show in the little flicker
of the flames. Worse still it brought thousands of



dark-grey and black moths, some nearly as big
as your hand, flapping and whirring round their
ears. They could not stand that, nor the huge
bats, black as a top-hat, either; so they gave up
fires and sat at night and dozed in the
enormous uncanny darkness.

All this went on for what seemed to the
hobbit ages upon ages; and he was always
hungry, for they were extremely careful with their
provisions. Even so, as days followed days,
and still the forest seemed just the same, they
began to get anxious. The food would not last
for ever: it was in fact already beginning to get
low. They tried shooting at the squirrels, and
they wasted many arrows before they managed
to bring one down on the path. But when they
roasted it, it proved horrible to taste, and they
shot no more squirrels.

They were thirsty too, for they had none too
much water, and in all the time they had seen
neither spring nor stream. This was their state
when one day they found their path blocked by
a running water. It flowed fast and strong but not
very wide right across the way, and it was
black, or looked it in the gloom. It was well that
Beorn had warned them against it, or they
would have drunk from it, whatever its colour,
and filled some of their emptied skins at its
bank. As it was they only thought of how to



cross it without wetting themselves in its water.
There had been a bridge of wood across, but it
had rotted and fallen leaving only the broken
posts near the bank.

Bilbo kneeling on the brink and peering
forward cried: “There is a boat against the far
bank! Now why couldn’t it have been this side!”

“How far away do you think it is?” asked
Thorin, for by now they knew Bilbo had the
sharpest eyes among them.

"Not at all far. I shouldn’t think above twelve
yards.”

“Twelve yards! I should have thought it was
thirty at least, but my eyes don’t see as well as
they used a hundred years ago. Still twelve
yards is as good as a mile. We can’t jump it,
and we daren’t try to wade or swim.”

“Can any of you throw a rope?”

“What’s the good of that? The boat is sure
to be tied up, even if we could hook it, which I
doubt.”

“I don’t believe it is tied,” said Bilbo, “though
of course I can’t be sure in this light; but it looks
to me as if it was just drawn up on the bank,
which is low just there where the path goes
down into the water.”

“Dori is the strongest, but Fili is the
youngest and still has the best sight,” said
Thorin. “Come here Fili, and see if you can see



the boat Mr. Baggins is talking about.”

Fili thought he could; so when he had stared
a long while to get an idea of the direction, the
others brought him a rope. They had several
with them, and on the end of the longest they
fastened one of the large iron hooks they had
used for catching their packs to the straps
about their shoulders. Fili took this in his hand,
balanced it for a moment, and then flung it
across the stream.

Splash it fell in the water! “Not far enough!”
said Bilbo who was peering forward. “A couple
of feet and you would have dropped it on to the
boat. Try again. I don’t suppose the magic is
strong enough to hurt you, if you just touch a bit
of wet rope.”

Fili picked up the hook when he had drawn
it back, rather doubtfully all the same. This time
he threw it with great strength.

“Steady!” said Bilbo, “you have thrown it
right into the wood on the other side now. Draw
it back gently.” Fili hauled the rope back slowly,
and after a while Bilbo said: “Carefully! It is lying
on the boat; let’s hope the hook will catch.”

It did. The rope went taut, and Fili pulled in
vain. Kili came to his help, and then Oin and
Gloin. They tugged and tugged, and suddenly
they all fell over on their backs. Bilbo was on the
look out, however, caught the rope, and with a



piece of stick fended off the little black boat as
it came rushing across the stream. “Help!” he
shouted, and Balin was just in time to seize the
boat before it floated off down the current.

“It was tied after all,” said he, looking at the
snapped painter that was still dangling from it.
“That was a good pull, my lads; and a good job
that our rope was the stronger.”

“Who’ll cross first?” asked Bilbo.

“I shall,” said Thorin, “and you will come with
me, and Fili and Balin. That’s as many as the
boat will hold at a time. After that Kili and Oin
and Gloin and Dori; next Ori and Nori, Bifur and
Bofur; and last Dwalin and Bombur.”

“I’m always last and I don’t like it,” said
Bombur. “It’s somebody else’s turn today.”

“You should not be so fat. As you are, you
must be with the last and lightest boatload.
Don’t start grumbling against orders, or
something bad will happen to you.”

“There aren’t any oars. How are you going
to push the boat back to the far bank?” asked
the hobbit.

“Give me another length of rope and
another hook,” said Fili, and when they had got
it ready, he cast it into the darkness ahead and
as high as he could throw it. Since it did not fall
down again, they saw that it must have stuck in
the branches. “Get in now,” said Fili, “and one



of you haul on the rope that is stuck in a tree on
the other side. One of the others must keep
hold of the hook we used at first, and when we
are safe on the other side he can hook it on,
and you can draw the boat back.”

In this way they were all soon on the far
bank safe across the enchanted stream. Dwalin
had just scrambled out with the coiled rope on
his arm, and Bombur (still grumbling) was
getting ready to follow, when something bad did
happen. There was a flying sound of hooves on
the path ahead. Out of the gloom came
suddenly the shape of a flying deer, it charged
into the dwarves and bowled them over, then
gathered itself for a leap. High it sprang and
cleared the water with a mighty jump. But it did
not reach the other side in safety. Thorin was
the only one who had kept his feet and his wits.
As soon as they had landed he had bent his
bow and fitted an arrow in case any hidden
guardian of the boat appeared. Now he sent a
swift and sure shot into the leaping beast. As it
reached the further bank it stumbled. The
shadows swallowed it up, but they heard the
sound of hooves quickly falter and then go still.

Before they could shout in praise of the
shot, however, a dreadful wail from Bilbo put all
thoughts of venison out of their minds. “Bombur
has fallen in! Bombur is drowning!” he cried. It



was only too true. Bombur had only one foot on
the land when the hart bore down on him, and
sprang over him. He had stumbled, thrusting the
boat away from the bank, and then toppled
back into the dark water, his hands slipping off
the slimy roots at the edge, while the boat span
slowly off and disappeared.

They could still see his hood above the
water when they ran to the bank. Quickly, they
flung a rope with a hook towards him. His hand
caught it, and they pulled him to the shore. He
was drenched from hair to boots, of course, but
that was not the worst. When they laid him on
the bank he was already fast asleep, with one
hand clutching the rope so tight that they could
not get it from his grasp; and fast asleep he
remained in spite of all they could do.

They were still standing over him, cursing
their ill luck, and Bombur’s clumsiness, and
lamenting the loss of the boat which made it
impossible for them to go back and look for the
hart, when they became aware of the dim
blowing of horns in the wood and the sound as
of dogs baying far off. Then they all fell silent;
and as they sat it seemed they could hear the
noise of a great hunt going by to the north of the
path, though they saw no sign of it.

There they sat for a long while and did not
dare to make a move. Bombur slept on with a



smile on his fat face, as if he no longer cared
for all the troubles that vexed them. Suddenly on
the path ahead appeared some white deer, a
hind and fawns as snowy white as the hart had
been dark. They glimmered in the shadows.
Before Thorin could cry out three of the dwarves
had leaped to their feet and loosed off arrows
from their bows. None seemed to find their
mark. The deer turned and vanished in the trees
as silently as they had come, and in vain the
dwarves shot their arrows after them.

“Stop! stop!” shouted Thorin; but it was too
late, the excited dwarves had wasted their last
arrows, and now the bows that Beorn had given
them were useless.

They were a gloomy party that night, and the
gloom gathered still deeper on them in the
following days. They had crossed the
enchanted stream; but beyond it the path
seemed to straggle on just as before, and in the
forest they could see no change. Yet if they had
known more about it and considered the
meaning of the hunt and the white deer that had
appeared upon their path, they would have
known that they were at last drawing towards
the eastern edge, and would soon have come,
if they could have kept up their courage and
their hope, to thinner trees and places where
the sunlight came again.



But they did not know this, and they were
burdened with the heavy body of Bombur, which
they had to carry along with them as best they
could, taking the wearisome task in turns of four
each while the others shared their packs. If
these had not become all too light in the last few
days, they would never have managed it; but a
slumbering and smiling Bombur was a poor
exchange for packs filled with food however
heavy. In a few days a time came when there
was practically nothing left to eat or to drink.
Nothing wholesome could they see growing in
the wood, only funguses and herbs with pale
leaves and unpleasant smell.

About four days from the enchanted stream
they came to a part where most of the trees
were beeches. They were at first inclined to be
cheered by the change, for here there was no
undergrowth and the shadow was not so deep.
There was a greenish light about them, and in
places they could see some distance to either
side of the path. Yet the light only showed them
endless lines of straight grey trunks like the
pillars of some huge twilight hall. There was a
breath of air and a noise of wind, but it had a
sad sound. A few leaves came rustling down to
remind them that outside autumn was coming
on. Their feet ruffled among the dead leaves of
countless other autumns that drifted over the



banks of the path from the deep red carpets of
the forest.

Still Bombur slept and they grew very
weary. At times they heard disquieting laughter.
Sometimes there was singing in the distance
too. The laughter was the laughter of fair voices
not of goblins, and the singing was beautiful, but
it sounded eerie and strange, and they were not
comforted, rather they hurried on from those
parts with what strength they had left.

Two days later they found their path going
downwards, and before long they were in a
valley filled almost entirely with a mighty growth
of oaks.

“Is there no end to this accursed forest?”
said Thorin. “Somebody must climb a tree and
see if he can get his head above the roof and
have a look round. The only way is to choose
the tallest tree that overhangs the path.”

Of course “somebody” meant Bilbo. They
chose him, because to be of any use the
climber must get his head above the topmost
leaves, and so he must be light enough for the
highest and slenderest branches to bear him.
Poor Mr. Baggins had never had much practice
in climbing trees, but they hoisted him up into
the lowest branches of an enormous oak that
grew right out into the path, and up he had to go
as best he could. He pushed his way through



the tangled twigs with many a slap in the eye;
he was greened and grimed from the old bark
of the greater boughs; more than once he
slipped and caught himself just in time; and at
last, after a dreadful struggle in a difficult place
where there seemed to be no convenient
branches at all, he got near the top. All the time
he was wondering whether there were spiders
in the tree, and how he was going to get down
again (except by falling).

In the end he poked his head above the roof
of leaves, and then he found spiders all right.
But they were only small ones of ordinary size,
and they were after the butterflies. Bilbo’s eyes
were nearly blinded by the light. He could hear
the dwarves shouting up at him from far below,
but he could not answer, only hold on and blink.
The sun was shining brilliantly, and it was a long
while before he could bear it. When he could,
he saw all round him a sea of dark green,
ruffled here and there by the breeze; and there
were everywhere hundreds of butterflies. I
expect they were a kind of “purple emperor”, a
butterfly that loves the tops of oak-woods, but
these were not purple at all, they were a dark
dark velvety black without any markings to be
seen.

He looked at the “black emperors” for a
long time, and enjoyed the feel of the breeze in



his hair and on his face; but at length the cries
of the dwarves, who were now simply stamping
with impatience down below, reminded him of
his real business. It was no good. Gaze as
much as he might, he could see no end to the
trees and the leaves in any direction. His heart,
that had been lightened by the sight of the sun
and the feel of the wind, sank back into his toes:
there was no food to go back to down below.

Actually, as I have told you, they were not far
off the edge of the forest; and if Bilbo had had
the sense to see it, the tree that he had
climbed, though it was tall in itself, was standing
near the bottom of a wide valley, so that from its
top the trees seemed to swell up all round like
the edges of a great bowl, and he could not
expect to see how far the forest lasted. Still he
did not see this, and he climbed down full of
despair. He got to the bottom again at last,
scratched, hot, and miserable, and he could not
see anything in the gloom below when he got
there. His report soon made the others as
miserable as he was.

“The forest goes on for ever and ever and
ever in all directions! Whatever shall we do?
And what is the use of sending a hobbit!" they
cried, as if it was his fault. They did not care
tuppence about the butterflies, and were only
made more angry when he told them of the



beautiful breeze, which they were too heavy to
climb up and feel.


That night they ate their very last scraps and
crumbs of food; and next morning when they
woke the first thing they noticed was that they
were still gnawingly hungry, and the next thing
was that it was raining and that here and there
the drip of it was dropping heavily on the forest
floor. That only reminded them that they were
also parchingly thirsty, without doing anything to
relieve them: you cannot quench a terrible thirst
by standing under giant oaks and waiting for a
chance drip to fall on your tongue. The only
scrap of comfort there was came unexpectedly
from Bombur.

He woke up suddenly and sat up scratching
his head. He could not make out where he was
at all, nor why he felt so hungry; for he had
forgotten everything that had happened since
they started their journey that May morning long
ago. The last thing that he remembered was the
party at the hobbit’s house, and they had great
difficulty in making him believe their tale of all
the many adventures they had had since.

When he heard that there was nothing to
eat, he sat down and wept, for he felt very weak



and wobbly in the legs. “Why ever did I wake
up!” he cried. “I was having such beautiful
dreams. I dreamed I was walking in a forest
rather like this one, only lit with torches on the
trees and lamps swinging from the branches
and fires burning on the ground; and there was
a great feast going on, going on for ever. A
woodland king was there with a crown of
leaves, and there was a merry singing, and I
could not count or describe the things there
were to eat and drink.”

“You need not try,” said Thorin. “In fact if you
can’t talk about something else, you had better
be silent. We are quite annoyed enough with
you as it is. If you hadn’t waked up, we should
have left you to your idiotic dreams in the forest;
you are no joke to carry even after weeks of
short commons.”

There was nothing now to be done but to
tighten the belts round their empty stomachs,
and hoist their empty sacks and packs, and
trudge along the track without any great hope of
ever getting to the end before they lay down and
died of starvation. This they did all that day,
going very slowly and wearily; while Bombur
kept on wailing that his legs would not carry him
and that he wanted to lie down and sleep.

“No you don’t!” they said. “Let your legs
take their share, we have carried you far



enough.”

All the same he suddenly refused to go a
step further and flung himself on the ground. “Go
on, if you must,” he said. “I’m just going to lie
here and sleep and dream of food, if I can’t get
it any other way. I hope I never wake up again.”

At that very moment Balin, who was a little
way ahead, called out: “What was that? I
thought I saw a twinkle of light in the forest.”

They all looked, and a longish way off, it
seemed, they saw a red twinkle in the dark;
then another and another sprang out beside it.
Even Bombur got up, and they hurried along
then, not caring if it was trolls or goblins. The
light was in front of them and to the left of the
path, and when at last they had drawn level with
it, it seemed plain that torches and fires were
burning under the trees, but a good way off their
track.

“It looks as if my dreams were coming true,”
gasped Bombur puffing up behind. He wanted
to rush straight off into the wood after the lights.
But the others remembered only too well the
warnings of the wizard and of Beorn.

“A feast would be no good, if we never got
back alive from it,” said Thorin.

“But without a feast we shan’t remain alive
much longer anyway,” said Bombur, and Bilbo
heartily agreed with him. They argued about it



backwards and forwards for a long while, until
they agreed at length to send out a couple of
spies, to creep near the lights and find out more
about them. But then they could not agree on
who was to be sent: no one seemed anxious to
run the chance of being lost and never finding
his friends again. In the end, in spite of
warnings, hunger decided them, because
Bombur kept on describing all the good things
that were being eaten, according to his dream,
in the woodland feast; so they all left the path
and plunged into the forest together.

After a good deal of creeping and crawling
they peered round the trunks and looked into a
clearing where some trees had been felled and
the ground levelled. There were many people
there, elvish-looking folk, all dressed in green
and brown and sitting on sawn rings of the
felled trees in a great circle. There was a fire in
their midst and there were torches fastened to
some of the trees round about; but most
splendid sight of all: they were eating and
drinking and laughing merrily.

The smell of the roast meats was so
enchanting that, without waiting to consult one
another, every one of them got up and
scrambled forwards into the ring with the one
idea of begging for some food. No sooner had
the first stepped into the clearing than all the



lights went out as if by magic. Somebody
kicked the fire and it went up in rockets of
glittering sparks and vanished. They were lost
in a completely lightless dark and they could not
even find one another, not for a long time at any
rate. After blundering frantically in the gloom,
falling over logs, bumping crash into trees, and
shouting and calling till they must have waked
everything in the forest for miles, at last they
managed to gather themselves in a bundle and
count themselves by touch. By that time they
had, of course, quite forgotten in what direction
the path lay, and they were all hopelessly lost, at
least till morning.

There was nothing for it but to settle down
for the night where they were; they did not even
dare to search on the ground for scraps of food
for fear of becoming separated again. But they
had not been lying long, and Bilbo was only just
getting drowsy, when Dori, whose turn it was to
watch first, said in a loud whisper:

“The lights are coming out again over there,
and there are more than ever of them.”

Up they all jumped. There, sure enough, not
far away were scores of twinkling lights, and
they heard the voices and the laughter quite
plainly. They crept slowly towards them, in a
single line, each touching the back of the one in
front. When they got near Thorin said: “No



rushing forward this time! No one is to stir from
hiding till I say. I shall send Mr. Baggins alone
first to talk to them. They won’t be frightened of
him — (‘What about me of them?’ thought Bilbo)
— and any way I hope they won’t do anything
nasty to him.”

When they got to the edge of the circle of
lights they pushed Bilbo suddenly from behind.
Before he had time to slip on his ring, he
stumbled forward into the full blaze of the fire
and torches. It was no good. Out went all the
lights again and complete darkness fell.

If it had been difficult collecting themselves
before, it was far worse this time. And they
simply could not find the hobbit. Every time they
counted themselves it only made thirteen. They
shouted and called: “Bilbo Baggins! Hobbit!
You dratted hobbit! Hi! hobbit, confusticate you,
where are you?” and other things of that sort,
but there was no answer.

They were just giving up hope, when Dori
stumbled across him by sheer luck. In the dark
he fell over what he thought was a log, and he
found it was the hobbit curled up fast asleep. It
took a deal of shaking to wake him, and when
he was awake he was not pleased at all.

“I was having such a lovely dream,” he
grumbled, “all about having a most gorgeous
dinner.”



“Good heavens! he has gone like Bombur,”
they said. “Don’t tell us about dreams. Dream-
dinners aren’t any good, and we can’t share
them.”

“They are the best I am likely to get in this
beastly place,” he muttered, as he lay down
beside the dwarves and tried to go back to
sleep and find his dream again.

But that was not the last of the lights in the
forest. Later when the night must have been
getting old, Kili who was watching then, came
and roused them all again, saying:

“There’s a regular blaze of light begun not
far away — hundreds of torches and many fires
must have been lit suddenly and by magic. And
hark to the singing and the harps!”

After lying and listening for a while, they
found they could not resist the desire to go
nearer and try once more to get help. Up they
got again; and this time the result was
disastrous. The feast that they now saw was
greater and more magnificent than before; and
at the head of a long line of feasters sat a
woodland king with a crown of leaves upon his
golden hair, very much as Bombur had
described the figure in his dream. The elvish
folk were passing bowls from hand to hand and
across the fires, and some were harping and
many were singing. Their gleaming hair was



twined with flowers; green and white gems
glinted on their collars and their belts; and their
faces and their songs were filled with mirth.
Loud and clear and fair were those songs, and
out stepped Thorin in to their midst.

Dead silence fell in the middle of a word.
Out went all light. The fires leaped up in black
smokes. Ashes and cinders were in the eyes of
the dwarves, and the wood was filled again with
their clamour and their cries.

Bilbo found himself running round and round
(as he thought) and calling and calling: “Dori,
Nori, Ori, Oin, Gloin, Fili, Kili, Bombur, Bifur,
Bofur, Dwalin, Balin, Thorin Oakenshield,” while
people he could not see or feel were doing the
same all round him (with an occasional “Bilbo!”
thrown in). But the cries of the others got
steadily further and fainter, and though after a
while it seemed to him they changed to yells
and cries for help in the far distance, all noise at
last died right away, and he was left alone in
complete silence and darkness.


That was one of his most miserable moments.
But he soon made up his mind that it was no
good trying to do anything till day came with
some little light, and quite useless to go



blundering about tiring himself out with no hope
of any breakfast to revive him. So he sat himself
down with his back to a tree, and not for the last
time fell to thinking of his far-distant hobbit-hole
with its beautiful pantries. He was deep in
thoughts of bacon and eggs and toast and
butter when he felt something touch him.
Something like a strong sticky string was
against his left hand, and when he tried to move
he found that his legs were already wrapped in
the same stuff, so that when he got up he fell
over.

Then the great spider, who had been busy
tying him up while he dozed, came from behind
him and came at him. He could only see the
thing’s eyes, but he could feel its hairy legs as it
struggled to wind its abominable threads round
and round him. It was lucky that he had come to
his senses in time. Soon he would not have
been able to move at all. As it was, he had a
desperate fight before he got free. He beat the
creature off with his hands — it was trying to
poison him to keep him quiet, as small spiders
do to flies — until he remembered his sword and
drew it out. Then the spider jumped back, and
he had time to cut his legs loose. After that it
was his turn to attack. The spider evidently was
not used to things that carried such stings at
their sides, or it would have hurried away



quicker. Bilbo came at it before it could
disappear and stuck it with his sword right in
the eyes. Then it went mad and leaped and
danced and flung out its legs in horrible jerks,
until he killed it with another stroke; and then he
fell down and remembered nothing more for a
long while.

There was the usual dim grey light of the
forest-day about him when he came to his
senses. The spider lay dead beside him, and
his sword-blade was stained black. Somehow
the killing of the giant spider, all alone by
himself in the dark without the help of the wizard
or the dwarves or of anyone else, made a great
difference to Mr. Baggins. He felt a different
person, and much fiercer and bolder in spite of
an empty stomach, as he wiped his sword on
the grass and put it back into its sheath.

“I will give you a name,” he said to it, “and I
shall call you Sting.”

After that he set out to explore. The forest
was grim and silent, but obviously he had first of
all to look for his friends, who were not likely to
be very far off, unless they had been made
prisoners by the elves (or worse things). Bilbo
felt that it was unsafe to shout, and he stood a
long while wondering in what direction the path
lay, and in what direction he should go first to
look for the dwarves.



“O! why did we not remember Beorn’s
advice, and Gandalfs!” he lamented. “What a
mess we are in now! We! I only wish it was i/ie:
it is horrible being all alone.”

In the end he made as good a guess as he
could at the direction from which the cries for
help had come in the night — and by luck (he
was born with a good share of it) he guessed
more or less right, as you will see. Having made
up his mind he crept along as cleverly as he
could. Hobbits are clever at quietness,
especially in woods, as I have already told you;
also Bilbo had slipped on his ring before he
started. That is why the spiders neither saw nor
heard him coming.

He had picked his way stealthily for some
distance, when he noticed a place of dense
black shadow ahead of him, black even for that
forest, like a patch of midnight that had never
been cleared away. As he drew nearer, he saw
that it was made by spider-webs one behind
and over and tangled with another. Suddenly he
saw, too, that there were spiders huge and
horrible sitting in the branches above him, and
ring or no ring he trembled with fear lest they
should discover him. Standing behind a tree he
watched a group of them for some time, and
then in the silence and stillness of the wood he
realised that these loathsome creatures were



speaking one to another. Their voices were a
sort of thin creaking and hissing, but he could
make out many of the words that they said.
They were talking about the dwarves!

“It was a sharp struggle, but worth it,” said
one. “What nasty thick skins they have to be
sure, but I'll wager there is good juice inside.”

“Aye, they’ll make fine eating, when they’ve
hung a bit,” said another.

“Don’t hang ’em too long,” said a third.
“They’re not as fat as they might be. Been
feeding none too well of late, I should guess.”

“Kill ’em, I say,” hissed a fourth; “kill ’em
now and hang ’em dead for a while.”

“They’re dead now, I’ll warrant,” said the
first.

“That they are not. I saw one a-struggling
just now. Just coming round again, I should say,
after a bee-autiful sleep. I’ll show you.”

With that one of the fat spiders ran along a
rope till it came to a dozen bundles hanging in a
row from a high branch. Bilbo was horrified,
now that he noticed them for the first time
dangling in the shadows, to see a dwarvish foot
sticking out of the bottoms of some of the
bundles, or here and there the tip of a nose, or
a bit of beard or of a hood.

To the fattest of these bundles the spider
went — “It is poor old Bombur, I’ll bet,” thought



Bilbo — and nipped hard at the nose that stuck
out. There was a muffled yelp inside, and a toe
shot up and kicked the spider straight and hard.
There was life in Bombur still. There was a
noise like the kicking of a flabby football, and
the enraged spider fell off the branch, only
catching itself with its own thread just in time.

The others laughed. “You were quite right,”
they said, “the meat’s alive and kicking!”

“I’ll soon put an end to that,” hissed the
angry spider climbing back onto the branch.


Bilbo saw that the moment had come when he
must do something. He could not get up at the
brutes and he had nothing to shoot with; but
looking about he saw that in this place there
were many stones lying in what appeared to be
a now dry little watercourse. Bilbo was a pretty
fair shot with a stone, and it did not take him
long to find a nice smooth egg-shaped one that
fitted his hand cosily. As a boy he used to
practise throwing stones at things, until rabbits
and squirrels, and even birds, got out of his way
as quick as lightning if they saw him stoop; and
even grownup he had still spent a deal of his
time at quoits, dart-throwing, shooting at the
wand, bowls, ninepins and other quiet games of



the aiming and throwing sort — indeed he could
do lots of things, besides blowing smoke-rings,
asking riddles and cooking, that I haven’t had
time to tell you about. There is no time now.
While he was picking up stones, the spider had
reached Bombur, and soon he would have
been dead. At that moment Bilbo threw. The
stone struck the spider plunk on the head, and it
dropped senseless off the tree, flop to the
ground, with all its legs curled up.

The next stone went whizzing through a big
web, snapping its cords, and taking off the
spider sitting in the middle of it, whack, dead.
After that there was a deal of commotion in the
spider-colony, and they forgot the dwarves for a
bit, I can tell you. They could not see Bilbo, but
they could make a good guess at the direction
from which the stones were coming. As quick
as lightning they came running and swinging
towards the hobbit, flinging out their long
threads in all directions, till the air seemed full of
waving snares.

Bilbo, however, soon slipped away to a
different place. The idea came to him to lead
the furious spiders further and further away from
the dwarves, if he could; to make them curious,
excited and angry all at once. When about fifty
had gone off to the place where he had stood
before, he threw some more stones at these,



and at others that had stopped behind; then
dancing among the trees he began to sing a
song to infuriate them and bring them all after
him, and also to let the dwarves hear his voice.

This is what he sang:


Old fat spider spinning in a tree!

Old fat spider cant see me!
Attercop! Attercop!

Wont you stop,

Stop your spinning and look forme?


Old Tomnoddy, all big body,

Old Tomnoddy cant spy me!
Attercop! Attercop!

Down you drop!

Youll never catch me up your tree!


Not very good perhaps, but then you must
remember that he had to make it up himself, on
the spur of a very awkward moment. It did what
he wanted any way. As he sang he threw some
more stones and stamped. Practically all the
spiders in the place came after him: some



dropped to the ground, others raced along the
branches, swung from tree to tree, or cast new
ropes across the dark spaces. They made for
his noise far quicker than he had expected.
They were frightfully angry. Quite apart from the
stones no spider has ever liked being called
Attercop, and Tomnoddy of course is insulting
to anybody.

Off Bilbo scuttled to a fresh place, but
several of the spiders had run now to different
points in the glade where they lived, and were
busy spinning webs across all the spaces
between the tree-stems. Very soon the hobbit
would be caught in a thick fence of them all
round him — that at least was the spiders’ idea.
Standing now in the middle of the hunting and
spinning insects Bilbo plucked up his courage
and began a new song:


Lazy Lob and crazy Cob
are weaving webs to wind me.

I am far more sweet than other meat,
but still they cannot find me!


Here am I, naughty little fly;



you are fat and lazy.

You cannot trap me, though you try,
in your cobwebs crazy.


With that he turned and found that the last
space between two tall trees had been closed
with a web — but luckily not a proper web, only
great strands of double-thick spider-rope run
hastily backwards and forwards from trunk to
trunk. Out came his little sword. He slashed the
threads to pieces and went off singing.

The spiders saw the sword, though I don’t
suppose they knew what it was, and at once the
whole lot of them came hurrying after the hobbit
along the ground and the branches, hairy legs
waving, nippers and spinners snapping, eyes
popping, full of froth and rage. They followed
him into the forest until Bilbo had gone as far as
he dared. Then quieter than a mouse he stole
back.

He had precious little time, he knew, before
the spiders were disgusted and came back to
their trees where the dwarves were hung. In the
meanwhile he had to rescue them. The worst
part of the job was getting up on to the long
branch where the bundles were dangling. I don’t
suppose he would have managed it, if a spider
had not luckily left a rope hanging down; with its



help, though it stuck to his hand and hurt him, he
scrambled up — only to meet an old slow wicked
fat-bodied spider who had remained behind to
guard the prisoners, and had been busy
pinching them to see which was the juiciest to
eat. it had thought of starting the feast while the
others were away, but Mr. Baggins was in a
hurry, and before the spider knew what was
happening it felt his sting and rolled off the
branch dead.

Bilbo’s next job was to loose a dwarf. What
was he to do? If he cut the string which hung
him up, the wretched dwarf would tumble thump
to the ground a good way below. Wriggling
along the branch (which made all the poor
dwarves dance and dangle like ripe fruit) he
reached the first bundle.

“Fili or Kili,” he thought by the tip of a blue
hood sticking out at the top. “Most likely Fili," he
thought by the tip of a long nose poking out of
the winding threads. He managed by leaning
over to cut most of the strong sticky threads that
bound him round, and then, sure enough, with a
kick and a struggle most of Fili emerged. I am
afraid Bilbo actually laughed at the sight of him
jerking his stiff arms and legs as he danced on
the spider-string under his armpits, just like one
of those funny toys bobbing on a wire.

Somehow or other Fili was got on to the



branch, and then he did his best to help the
hobbit, although he was feeling very sick and ill
from spider-poison, and from hanging most of
the night and the next day wound round and
round with only his nose to breathe through. It
took him ages to get the beastly stuff out of his
eyes and eyebrows, and as for his beard, he
had to cut most of it off. Well, between them
they started to haul up first one dwarf and then
another and slash them free. None of them
were better off than Fili, and some of them were
worse. Some had hardly been able to breathe
at all (long noses are sometimes useful you
see) and some had been more poisoned.

In this way they rescued Kili, Bifur, Bofur,
Dori and Nori. Poor old Bombur was so
exhausted — he was the fattest and had been
constantly pinched and poked — that he just
rolled off the branch and fell plop on to the
ground, fortunately on to leaves, and lay there.
But there were still five dwarves hanging at the
end of the branch when the spiders began to
come back, more full of rage than ever.

Bilbo immediately went to the end of the
branch nearest the tree-trunk and kept back
those that crawled up. He had taken off his ring
when he rescued Fili and forgotten to put it on
again, so now they all began to splutter and
hiss:



“Now we see you, you nasty little creature!
We will eat you and leave your bones and skin
hanging on a tree. Ugh! he’s got a sting has
he? Well, we’ll get him all the same, and then
we’ll hang him head downwards for a day or
two.”

While this was going on, the other dwarves
were working at the rest of the captives, and
cutting at the threads with their knives. Soon all
would be free, though it was not clear what
would happen after that. The spiders had
caught them pretty easily the night before, but
that had been unawares and in the dark. This
time there looked like being a horrible battle.

Suddenly Bilbo noticed that some of the
spiders had gathered round old Bombur on the
floor, and had tied him up again and were
dragging him away. He gave a shout and
slashed at the spiders in front of him. They
quickly gave way, and he scrambled and fell
down the tree right into the middle of those on
the ground. His little sword was something new
in the way of stings for them. How it darted to
and fro! It shone with delight as he stabbed at
them. Half a dozen were killed before the rest
drew off and left Bombur to Bilbo.

“Come down! Come down!” he shouted to
the dwarves on the branch. “Don’t stay up there
and be netted!” For he saw spiders swarming



up all the neighbouring trees, and crawling
along the boughs above the heads of the
dwarves.

Down the dwarves scrambled or jumped or
dropped, eleven all in a heap, most of them very
shaky and little use on their legs. There they
were at last, twelve of them counting poor old
Bombur, who was being propped up on either
side by his cousin Bifur, and his brother Bofur;
and Bilbo was dancing about and waving his
Sting; and hundreds of angry spiders were
goggling at them all round and about and
above. It looked pretty hopeless.

Then the battle began. Some of the
dwarves had knives, and some had sticks, and
all of them could get at stones; and Bilbo had
his elvish dagger. Again and again the spiders
were beaten off, and many of them were killed.
But it could not go on for long. Bilbo was nearly
tired out; only four of the dwarves were able to
stand firmly, and soon they would all be
overpowered like weary flies. Already the
spiders were beginning to weave their webs all
round them again from tree to tree.

In the end Bilbo could think of no plan
except to let the dwarves into the secret of his
ring. He was rather sorry about it, but it could
not be helped.

“I am going to disappear,” he said. “I shall



draw the spiders off, if I can; and you must keep
together and make in the opposite direction. To
the left there, that is more or less the way
towards the place where we last saw the elf-
fires.”

It was difficult to get them to understand,
what with their dizzy heads, and the shouts, and
the whacking of sticks and the throwing of
stones; but at last Bilbo felt he could delay no
longer — the spiders were drawing their circle
ever closer. He suddenly slipped on his ring,
and to the great astonishment of the dwarves
he vanished.

Soon there came the sound of “Lazy Lob”
and “Attercop” from among the trees away on
the right. That upset the spiders greatly. They
stopped advancing, and some went off in the
direction of the voice. “Attercop” made them so
angry that they lost their wits. Then Balin, who
had grasped Bilbo’s plan better than the rest,
led an attack. The dwarves huddled together in
a knot, and sending a shower of stones they
drove at the spiders on the left, and burst
through the ring. Away behind them now the
shouting and singing suddenly stopped.

Hoping desperately that Bilbo had not been
caught the dwarves went on. Not fast enough,
though. They were sick and weary, and they
could not go much better than a hobble and a



wobble, though many of the spiders were close
behind. Every now and then they had to turn and
fight the creatures that were overtaking them;
and already some spiders were in the trees
above them and throwing down their long
clinging threads.

Things were looking pretty bad again, when
suddenly Bilbo reappeared, and charged into
the astonished spiders unexpectedly from the
side.

“Go on! Go on!” he shouted. “I will do the
stinging!”

And he did. He darted backwards and
forwards, slashing at spider-threads, hacking at
their legs, and stabbing at their fat bodies if
they came too near. The spiders swelled with
rage, and spluttered and frothed, and hissed
out horrible curses; but they had become
mortally afraid of Sting, and dared not come
very near, now that it had come back. So curse
as they would, their prey moved slowly but
steadily away. It was a most terrible business,
and seemed to take hours. But at last, just when
Bilbo felt that he could not lift his hand for a
single stroke more, the spiders suddenly gave it
up, and followed them no more, but went back
disappointed to their dark colony.

The dwarves then noticed that they had
come to the edge of a ring where elf-fires had



been. Whether it was one of those they had
seen the night before, they could not tell. But it
seemed that some good magic lingered in such
spots, which the spiders did not like. At any rate
here the light was greener, and the boughs less
thick and threatening, and they had a chance to
rest and draw breath.

There they lay for some time, puffing and
panting. But very soon they began to ask
questions. They had to have the whole
vanishing business carefully explained, and the
finding of the ring interested them so much that
for a while they forgot their own troubles. Balin
in particular insisted on having the Gollum story,
riddles and all, told all over again, with the ring
in its proper place. But after a time the light
began to fail, and then other questions were
asked. Where were they, and where was their
path, and where was there any food, and what
were they going to do next? These questions
they asked over and over again, and it was
from little Bilbo that they seemed to expect to
get the answers. From which you can see that
they had changed their opinion of Mr. Baggins
very much, and had begun to have a great
respect for him (as Gandalf had said they
would). Indeed they really expected him to think
of some wonderful plan for helping them, and
were not merely grumbling. They knew only too



well that they would soon all have been dead, if
it had not been for the hobbit; and they thanked
him many times. Some of them even got up and
bowed right to the ground before him, though
they fell over with the effort, and could not get on
their legs again for some time. Knowing the
truth about the vanishing did not lessen their
opinion of Bilbo at all; for they saw that he had
some wits, as well as luck and a magic ring —
and all three are very useful possessions. In fact
they praised him so much that Bilbo began to
feel there really was something of a bold
adventurer about himself after all, though he
would have felt a lot bolder still, if there had
been anything to eat.

But there was nothing, nothing at all; and
none of them were fit to go and look for
anything, or to search for the lost path. The lost
path! No other idea would come into Bilbo’s
tired head. He just sat staring in front of him at
the endless trees; and after a while they all fell
silent again. All except Balin. Long after the
others had stopped talking and shut their eyes,
he kept on muttering and chuckling to himself.

“Gollum! Well I’m blest! So that’s how he
sneaked past me, is it? Now I know! Just crept
quietly along did you, Mr. Baggins? Buttons all
over the doorstep! Good old Bilbo — Bilbo —
Bilbo — bo — bo — bo — ” And then he fell asleep,



and there was complete silence for a long
while.

All of a sudden Dwalin opened an eye, and
looked round at them. “Where is Thorin?” he
asked.

It was a terrible shock. Of course there were
only thirteen of them, twelve dwarves and the
hobbit. Where indeed was Thorin? They
wondered what evil fate had befallen him,
magic or dark monsters; and shuddered as
they lay lost in the forest. There they dropped off
one by one into uncomfortable sleep full of
horrible dreams, as evening wore to black
night; and there we must leave them for the
present, too sick and weary to set guards or to
take turns at watching.

Thorin had been caught much faster than
they had. You remember Bilbo falling like a log
into sleep, as he stepped into a circle of light?
The next time it had been Thorin who stepped
forward, and as the lights went out he fell like a
stone enchanted. All the noise of the dwarves
lost in the night, their cries as the spiders
caught them and bound them, and all the
sounds of the battle next day, had passed over
him unheard. Then the Wood-elves had come
to him, and bound him, and carried him away.

The feasting people were Wood-elves, of
course. These are not wicked folk. If they have a



fault it is distrust of strangers. Though their
magic was strong, even in those days they were
wary. They differed from the High Elves of the
West, and were more dangerous and less wise.
For most of them (together with their scattered
relations in the hills and mountains) were
descended from the ancient tribes that never
went to Faerie in the West. There the Light-
elves and the Deep-elves and the Sea-elves
went and lived for ages, and grew fairer and
wiser and more learned, and invented their
magic and their cunning craft in the making of
beautiful and marvellous things, before some
came back into the Wide World. In the Wide
World the Wood-elves lingered in the twilight of
our Sun and Moon, but loved best the stars; and
they wandered in the great forests that grew tall
in lands that are now lost. They dwelt most often
by the edges of the woods, from which they
could escape at times to hunt, or to ride and run
over the open lands by moonlight or starlight;
and after the coming of Men they took ever
more and more to the gloaming and the dusk.
Still elves they were and remain, and that is
Good People.

In a great cave some miles within the edge
of Mirkwood on its eastern side there lived at
this time their greatest king. Before his huge
doors of stone a river ran out of the heights of



the forest and flowed on and out into the
marshes at the feet of the high wooded lands.
This great cave, from which countless smaller
ones opened out on every side, wound far
underground and had many passages and wide
halls; but it was lighter and more wholesome
than any goblin-dwelling, and neither so deep
nor so dangerous. In fact the subjects of the
king mostly lived and hunted in the open woods,
and had houses or huts on the ground and in
the branches. The beeches were their favourite
trees. The king’s cave was his palace, and the
strong place of his treasure, and the fortress of
his people against their enemies.

It was also the dungeon of his prisoners. So
to the cave they dragged Thorin — not too gently,
for they did not love dwarves, and thought he
was an enemy. In ancient days they had had
wars with some of the dwarves, whom they
accused of stealing their treasure. It is only fair
to say that the dwarves gave a different
account, and said that they only took what was
their due, for the elf-king had bargained with
them to shape his raw gold and silver, and had
afterwards refused to give them their pay. If the
elf-king had a weakness it was for treasure,
especially for silver and white gems; and though
his hoard was rich, he was ever eager for more,
since he had not yet as great a treasure as



other elf-lords of old. His people neither mined
nor worked metals or jewels, nor did they bother
much with trade or with tilling the earth. All this
was well known to every dwarf, though Thorin’s
family had had nothing to do with the old quarrel
I have spoken of. Consequently Thorin was
angry at their treatment of him, when they took
their spell off him and he came to his senses;
and also he was determined that no word of
gold or jewels should be dragged out of him.

The king looked sternly on Thorin, when he
was brought before him, and asked him many
questions. But Thorin would only say that he
was starving.

“Why did you and your folk three times try to
attack my people at their merrymaking?” asked
the king.

“We did not attack them,” answered Thorin;
“we came to beg, because we were starving.”

“Where are your friends now, and what are
they doing?”

“I don’t know, but I expect starving in the
forest.”

“What were you doing in the forest?”

“Looking for food and drink, because we
were starving.”

“But what brought you into the forest at all?”
asked the king angrily.

At that Thorin shut his mouth and would not



say another word.

“Very well!” said the king. “Take him away
and keep him safe, until he feels inclined to tell
the truth, even if he waits a hundred years.”

Then the elves put thongs on him, and shut
him in one of the inmost caves with strong
wooden doors, and left him. They gave him
food and drink, plenty of both, if not very fine; for
Wood-elves were not goblins, and were
reasonably well-behaved even to their worst
enemies, when they captured them. The giant
spiders were the only living things that they had
no mercy upon.

There in the king’s dungeon poor Thorin lay;
and after he had got over his thankfulness for
bread and meat and water, he began to wonder
what had become of his unfortunate friends. It
was not very long before he discovered; but that
belongs to the next chapter and the beginning
of another adventure in which the hobbit again
showed his usefulness.




Chapter IX


BARRELS OUT OF BOND


The day after the battle with the spiders Bilbo
and the dwarves made one last despairing
effort to find a way out before they died of
hunger and thirst. They got up and staggered on
in the direction which eight out of the thirteen of
them guessed to be the one in which the path
lay; but they never found out if they were right.
Such day as there ever was in the forest was
fading once more into the blackness of night,
when suddenly out sprang the light of many
torches all round them, like hundreds of red
stars. Out leaped Wood-elves with their bows
and spears and called the dwarves to halt.

There was no thought of a fight. Even if the
dwarves had not been in such a state that they
were actually glad to be captured, their small
knives, the only weapons they had, would have
been of no use against the arrows of the elves
that could hit a bird's eye in the dark. So they
simply stopped dead and sat down and waited
— all except Bilbo, who popped on his ring and


slipped quickly to one side. That is why, when
the elves bound the dwarves in a long line, one
behind the other, and counted them, they never
found or counted the hobbit.

Nor did they hear or feel him trotting along
well behind their torch-light as they led off their
prisoners into the forest. Each dwarf was
blindfold, but that did not make much difference,
for even Bilbo with the use of his eyes could not
see where they were going, and neither he nor
the others knew where they had started from
anyway. Bilbo had all he could do to keep up
with the torches, for the elves were making the
dwarves go as fast as ever they could, sick and
weary as they were. The king had ordered them
to make haste. Suddenly the torches stopped,
and the hobbit had just time to catch them up
before they began to cross the bridge. This was
the bridge that led across the river to the king’s
doors. The water flowed dark and swift and
strong beneath; and at the far end were gates
before the mouth of a huge cave that ran into
the side of a steep slope covered with trees.
There the great beeches came right down to
the bank, till their feet were in the stream.

Across the bridge the elves thrust their
prisoners, but Bilbo hesitated in the rear. He
did not at all like the look of the cavern-mouth,
and he only made up his mind not to desert his
friends just in time to scuttle over at the heels of
the last elves, before the great gates of the king



closed behind them with a clang.

Inside the passages were lit with red torch-
light, and the elf-guards sang as they marched
along the twisting, crossing, and echoing paths.
These were not like those of the goblin-cities;
they were smaller, less deep underground, and
filled with a cleaner air. In a great hall with pillars
hewn out of the living stone sat the Elvenking on
a chair of carven wood. On his head was a
crown of berries and red leaves, for the autumn
was come again. In the spring he wore a crown
of woodland flowers. In his hand he held a
carven staff of oak.




The Elvenking's Gate.

The prisoners were brought before him; and
though he looked grimly at them, he told his
men to unbind them, for they were ragged and
weary. “Besides they need no ropes in here,”
said he. “There is no escape from my magic
doors for those who are once brought inside.”

Long and searchingly he questioned the
dwarves about their doings, and where they
were going to, and where they were coming
from; but he got little more news out of them
than out of Thorin. They were surly and angry
and did not even pretend to be polite.



“What have we done, O king?” said Balin,
who was the eldest left. “Is it a crime to be lost
in the forest, to be hungry and thirsty, to be
trapped by spiders? Are the spiders your tame
beasts or your pets, if killing them makes you
angry?”

Such a question of course made the king
angrier than ever, and he answered: “It is a
crime to wander in my realm without leave. Do
you forget that you were in my kingdom, using
the road that my people made? Did you not
three times pursue and trouble my people in the
forest and rouse the spiders with your riot and
clamour? After all the disturbance you have
made I have a right to know what brings you
here, and if you will not tell me now, I will keep
you all in prison until you have learned sense
and manners!”

Then he ordered the dwarves each to be
put in a separate cell and to be given food and
drink, but not to be allowed to pass the doors of
their little prisons, until one at least of them was
willing to tell him all he wanted to know. But he
did not tell them that Thorin was also a prisoner
with him. It was Bilbo who found that out.


Poor Mr. Baggins — it was a weary long time
that he lived in that place all alone, and always
in hiding, never daring to take off his ring, hardly



daring to sleep, even tucked away in the
darkest and remotest corners he could find. For
something to do he took to wandering about the
Elvenking's palace. Magic shut the gates, but
he could sometimes get out, if he was quick.
Companies of the Wood-elves, sometimes with
the king at their head, would from time to time
ride out to hunt, or to other business in the
woods and in the lands to the East. Then if
Bilbo was very nimble, he could slip out just
behind them; though it was a dangerous thing to
do. More than once he was nearly caught in the
doors, as they clashed together when the last
elf passed; yet he did not dare to march among
them because of his shadow (altogether thin
and wobbly as it was in torchlight), or for fear of
being bumped into and discovered. And when
he did go out, which was not very often, he did
no good. Fie did not wish to desert the dwarves,
and indeed he did not know where in the world
to go without them. He could not keep up with
the hunting elves all the time they were out, so
he never discovered the ways out of the wood,
and was left to wander miserably in the forest,
terrified of losing himself, until a chance came
of returning. He was hungry too outside, for he
was no hunter; but inside the caves he could
pick up a living of some sort by stealing food
from store or table when no one was at hand.

“I am like a burglar that can’t get away, but
must go on miserably burgling the same house



day after day,” he thought. “This is the dreariest
and dullest part of all this wretched, tiresome,
uncomfortable adventure! I wish I was back in
my hobbit-hole by my own warm fireside with
the lamp shining!” He often wished, too, that he
could get a message for help sent to the wizard,
but that of course was quite impossible; and he
soon realized that if anything was to be done, it
would have to be done by Mr. Baggins, alone
and unaided.

Eventually, after a week or two of this
sneaking sort of life, by watching and following
the guards and taking what chances he could,
he managed to find out where each dwarf was
kept. He found all their twelve cells in different
parts of the palace, and after a time he got to
know his way about very well. What was his
surprise one day to overhear some of the
guards talking and to learn that there was
another dwarf in prison too, in a specially deep
dark place. He guessed at once, of course, that
that was Thorin; and after a while he found that
his guess was right. At last after many
difficulties he managed to find the place when
no one was about, and to have a word with the
chief of the dwarves.

Thorin was too wretched to be angry any
longer at his misfortunes, and was even
beginning to think of telling the king all about his
treasure and his quest (which shows how low-
spirited he had become), when he heard



Bilbo’s little voice at his keyhole. He could
hardly believe his ears. Soon however he made
up his mind that he could not be mistaken, and
he came to the door and had a long whispered
talk with the hobbit on the other side.

So it was that Bilbo was able to take
secretly Thorin's message to each of the other
imprisoned dwarves, telling them that Thorin
their chief was also in prison close at hand, and
that no one was to reveal their errand to the
king, not yet, nor before Thorin gave the word.
For Thorin had taken heart again hearing how
the hobbit had rescued his companions from
the spiders, and was determined once more
not to ransom himself with promises to the king
of a share in the treasure, until all hope of
escaping in any other way had disappeared;
until in fact the remarkable Mr. Invisible Baggins
(of whom he began to have a very high opinion
indeed) had altogether failed to think of
something clever.

The other dwarves quite agreed when they
got the message. They all thought their own
shares in the treasure (which they quite
regarded as theirs, in spite of their plight and
the still unconquered dragon) would suffer
seriously if the Wood-elves claimed part of it,
and they all trusted Bilbo. Just what Gandalf had
said would happen, you see. Perhaps that was
part of his reason for going off and leaving
them.



Bilbo, however, did not feel nearly so
hopeful as they did. He did not like being
depended on by everyone, and he wished he
had the wizard at hand. But that was no use:
probably all the dark distance of Mirkwood lay
between them. He sat and thought and thought,
until his head nearly burst, but no bright idea
would come. One invisible ring was a very fine
thing, but it was not much good among fourteen.
But of course, as you have guessed, he did
rescue his friends in the end, and this is how it
happened.

One day, nosing and wandering about,
Bilbo discovered a very interesting thing: the
great gates were not the only entrance to the
caves. A stream flowed under part of the lowest
regions of the palace, and joined the Forest
River some way further to the east, beyond the
steep slope out of which the main mouth
opened. Where this underground watercourse
came forth from the hillside there was a water-
gate. There the rocky roof came down close to
the surface of the stream, and from it a
portcullis could be dropped right to the bed of
the river to prevent anyone coming in or out that
way. But the portcullis was often open, for a
good deal of traffic went out and in by the water-
gate. If anyone had come in that way, he would
have found himself in a dark rough tunnel
leading deep into the heart of the hill; but at one
point where it passed under the caves the roof



had been cut away and covered with great
oaken trapdoors. These opened upwards into
the king’s cellars. There stood barrels, and
barrels, and barrels; for the Wood-elves, and
especially their king, were very fond of wine,
though no vines grew in those parts. The wine,
and other goods, were brought from far away,
from their kinsfolk in the South, or from the
vineyards of Men in distant lands.

Hiding behind one of the largest barrels
Bilbo discovered the trapdoors and their use,
and lurking there, listening to the talk of the
king's servants, he learned how the wine and
other goods came up the rivers, or over land, to
the Long Lake. It seemed a town of Men still
throve there, built out on bridges far into the
water as a protection against enemies of all
sorts, and especially against the dragon of the
Mountain. From Lake-town the barrels were
brought up the Forest River. Often they were
just tied together like big rafts and poled or
rowed up the stream; sometimes they were
loaded on to flat boats.

When the barrels were empty the elves cast
them through the trapdoors, opened the water-
gate, and out the barrels floated on the stream,
bobbing along, until they were carried by the
current to a place far down the river where the
bank jutted out, near to the very eastern edge of
Mirkwood. There they were collected and tied
together and floated back to Lake-town, which



stood close to the point where the Forest River
flowed into the Long Lake.


For some time Bilbo sat and thought about this
water-gate, and wondered if it could be used for
the escape of his friends, and at last he had the
desperate beginnings of a plan.

The evening meal had been taken to the
prisoners. The guards were tramping away
down the passages taking the torchlight with
them and leaving everything in darkness. Then
Bilbo heard the king's butler bidding the chief of
the guards good-night.

“Now come with me,” he said, “and taste
the new wine that has just come in. I shall be
hard at work tonight clearing the cellars of the
empty wood, so let us have a drink first to help
the labour.”

“Very good,” laughed the chief of the
guards. “I’ll taste with you, and see if it is fit for
the king’s table. There is a feast tonight and it
would not do to send up poor stuff!”


When he heard this Bilbo was all in a flutter, for
he saw that luck was with him and he had a
chance at once to try his desperate plan. Fie
followed the two elves, until they entered a small
cellar and sat down at a table on which two



large flagons were set. Soon they began to
drink and laugh merrily. Luck of an unusual kind
was with Bilbo then. It must be potent wine to
make a wood-elf drowsy; but this wine, it would
seem, was the heady vintage of the great
gardens of Dorwinion, not meant for his
soldiers or his servants, but for the king's feasts
only, and for smaller bowls not for the butler’s
great flagons.

Very soon the chief guard nodded his head,
then he laid it on the table and fell fast asleep.
The butler went on talking and laughing to
himself for a while without seeming to notice,
but soon his head too nodded to the table, and
he fell asleep and snored beside his friend.
Then in crept the hobbit. Very soon the chief
guard had no keys, but Bilbo was trotting as
fast as he could along the passages towards
the cells. The great bunch seemed very heavy
to his arms, and his heart was often in his
mouth, in spite of his ring, for he could not
prevent the keys from making every now and
then a loud clink and clank, which put him all in
a tremble.

First he unlocked Balin’s door, and locked it
again carefully as soon as the dwarf was
outside. Balin was most surprised, as you can
imagine; but glad as he was to get out of his
wearisome little stone room, he wanted to stop
and ask questions, and know what Bilbo was
going to do, and all about it.



“No time now!” said the hobbit. “You just
follow me! We must all keep together and not
risk getting separated. All of us must escape or
none, and this is our last chance. If this is found
out, goodness knows where the king will put you
next, with chains on your hands and feet too, I
expect. Don't argue, there’s a good fellow!”

Then off he went from door to door, until his
following had grown to twelve — none of them
any too nimble, what with the dark, and what
with their long imprisonment. Bilbo’s heart
thumped every time one of them bumped into
another, or grunted or whispered in the dark.
“Drat this dwarvish racket!” he said to himself.
But all went well, and they met no guards. As a
matter of fact there was a great autumn feast in
the woods that night, and in the halls above.
Nearly all the king’s folk were merrymaking.

At last after much blundering they came to
Thorin’s dungeon, far down in a deep place and
fortunately not far from the cellars.

“Upon my word!” said Thorin, when Bilbo
whispered to him to come out and join his
friends, “Gandalf spoke true, as usual! A pretty
fine burglar you make, it seems, when the time
comes. I am sure we are all for ever at your
service, whatever happens after this. But what
comes next?”

Bilbo saw that the time had come to explain
his idea, as far as he could; but he did not feel
at all sure how the dwarves would take it. His



fears were quite justified, for they did not like it
a bit, and started grumbling loudly in spite of
their danger.

“We shall be bruised and battered to
pieces, and drowned too, for certain!” they
muttered. “We thought you had got some
sensible notion, when you managed to get hold
of the keys. This is a mad idea!”

“Very well!” said Bilbo very downcast, and
also rather annoyed. “Come along back to your
nice cells, and I will lock you all in again, and
you can sit there comfortably and think of a
better plan — but I don't suppose I shall ever get
hold of the keys again, even if I feel inclined to
try.”

That was too much for them, and they
calmed down. In the end, of course, they had to
do just what Bilbo suggested, because it was
obviously impossible for them to try and find
their way into the upper halls, or to fight their
way out of gates that closed by magic; and it
was no good grumbling in the passages until
they were caught again. So following the hobbit,
down into the lowest cellars they crept. They
passed a door through which the chief guard
and the butler could be seen still happily snoring
with smiles upon their faces. The wine of
Dorwinion brings deep and pleasant dreams.
There would be a different expression on the
face of the chief guard next day, even though
Bilbo, before they went on, stole in and kind-



heartedly put the keys back on his belt.

“That will save him some of the trouble he is
in for,” said Mr. Baggins to himself. “He wasn’t
a bad fellow, and quite decent to the prisoners.
It will puzzle them all too. They will think we had
a very strong magic to pass through all those
locked doors and disappear. Disappear! We
have got to get busy very quick, if that is to
happen!”


Balin was told off to watch the guard and the
butler and give warning if they stirred. The rest
went into the adjoining cellar with the trapdoors.
There was little time to lose. Before long, as
Bilbo knew, some elves were under orders to
come down and help the butler get the empty
barrels through the doors into the stream.
These were in fact already standing in rows in
the middle of the floor waiting to be pushed off.
Some of them were wine-barrels, and these
were not much use, as they could not easily be
opened at the end without a deal of noise, nor
could they easily be secured again. But among
them were several others, which had been used
for bringing other stuffs, butter, apples, and all
sorts of things, to the king’s palace.