“Undoubtedly that was what brought the
dragon. Dragons steal gold and jewels, you
know, from men and elves and dwarves,
wherever they can find them; and they guard
their plunder as long as they live (which is
practically for ever, unless they are killed), and
never enjoy a brass ring of it. Indeed they hardly
know a good bit of work from a bad, though
they usually have a good notion of the current
market value; and they can’t make a thing for
themselves, not even mend a little loose scale
of their armour. There were lots of dragons in



the North in those days, and gold was probably
getting scarce up there, with the dwarves flying
south or getting killed, and all the general waste
and destruction that dragons make going from
bad to worse. There was a most specially
greedy, strong and wicked worm called Smaug.
One day he flew up into the air and came south.
The first we heard of it was a noise like a
hurricane coming from the North, and the pine-
trees on the Mountain creaking and cracking in
the wind. Some of the dwarves who happened
to be outside (I was one luckily — a fine
adventurous lad in those days, always
wandering about, and it saved my life that day)
— well, from a good way off we saw the dragon
settle on our mountain in a spout of flame. Then
he came down the slopes and when he reached
the woods they all went up in fire. By that time
all the bells were ringing in Dale and the
warriors were arming. The dwarves rushed out
of their great gate; but there was the dragon
waiting for them. None escaped that way. The
river rushed up in steam and a fog fell on Dale,
and in the fog the dragon came on them and
destroyed most of the warriors — the usual
unhappy story, it was only too common in those
days. Then he went back and crept in through
the Front Gate and routed out all the halls, and
lanes, and tunnels, alleys, cellars, mansions and



passages. After that there were no dwarves left
alive inside, and he took all their wealth for
himself. Probably, for that is the dragons’ way,
he has piled it all up in a great heap far inside,
and sleeps on it for a bed. Later he used to
crawl out of the great gate and come by night to
Dale, and carry away people, especially
maidens, to eat, until Dale was ruined, and all
the people dead or gone. What goes on there
now I don’t know for certain, but I don’t suppose
any one lives nearer to the Mountain than the far
edge of the Long Lake now-a-days.

“The few of us that were well outside sat
and wept in hiding, and cursed Smaug; and
there we were unexpectedly joined by my father
and my grandfather with singed beards. They
looked very grim but they said very little. When I
asked how they had got away, they told me to
hold my tongue, and said that one day in the
proper time I should know. After that we went
away, and we have had to earn our livings as
best we could up and down the lands, often
enough sinking as low as blacksmith-work or
even coalmining. But we have never forgotten
our stolen treasure. And even now, when I will
allow we have a good bit laid by and are not so
badly off’ — here Thorin stroked the gold chain
round his neck — “we still mean to get it back,
and to bring our curses home to Smaug — if we



can.

“I have often wondered about my father’s
and my grandfather’s escape. I see now they
must have had a private Side-door which only
they knew about. But apparently they made a
map, and I should like to know how Gandalf got
hold of it, and why it did not come down to me,
the rightful heir.”

“I did not ‘get hold of it,' I was given it,” said
the wizard. “Your grandfather Thror was killed,
you remember, in the mines of Moria by Azoa
the Goblin .”

“Curse his name, yes,” said Thorin.

“And Thrain your father went away on the
twenty-first of April, a hundred years ago last
Thursday, and has never been seen by you
since — ”

“True, true,” said Thorin.

“Well, your father gave me this to give to
you; and if I have chosen my own time and way
for handing it over, you can hardly blame me,
considering the trouble I had to find you. Your
father could not remember his own name when
he gave me the paper, and he never told me
yours; so on the whole I think I ought to be
praised and thanked! Here it is,” said he
handing the map to Thorin.

“I don’t understand,” said Thorin, and Bilbo
felt he would have liked to say the same. The


explanation did not seem to explain.

“Your grandfather,” said the wizard slowly
and grimly, “gave the map to his son for safety
before he went to the mines of Moria. Your
father went away to try his luck with the map
after your grandfather was killed; and lots of
adventures of a most unpleasant sort he had,
but he never got near the Mountain. How he got
there I don’t know, but I found him a prisoner in
the dungeons of the Necromancer.”

“Whatever were you doing there?” asked
Thorin with a shudder, and all the dwarves
shivered.

"Never you mind. I was finding things out, as
usual; and a nasty dangerous business it was.
Even I, Gandalf, only just escaped. I tried to
save your father, but it was too late. He was
witless and wandering, and had forgotten
almost everything except the map and the key.”

“We have long ago paid the goblins of
Moria,” said Thorin; “we must give a thought to
the Necromancer.”

“Don’t be absurd! He is an enemy far
beyond the powers of all the dwarves put
together, if they could all be collected again
from the four corners of the world. The one thing
your father wished was for his son to read the
map and use the key. The dragon and the
Mountain are more than big enough tasks for



you!”

“Hear, hear!” said Bilbo, and accidentally
said it aloud.

“Hear what?” they all said turning suddenly
towards him, and he was so flustered that he
answered “Hear what I have got to say!”

“What’s that?” they asked.

“Well, I should say that you ought to go East
and have a look round. After all there is the
Side-door, and dragons must sleep
sometimes, I suppose. If you sit on the door-
step long enough, I daresay you will think of
something. And well, don’t you know, I think we
have talked long enough for one night, if you
see what I mean. What about bed, and an early
start, and all that? I will give you a good
breakfast before you go.”

“Before we go, I suppose you mean,” said
Thorin. “Aren’t you the burglar? And isn’t sitting
on the door-step your job, not to speak of
getting inside the door? But I agree about bed
and breakfast. I like six eggs with my ham,
when starting on a journey: fried not poached,
and mind you don’t break ’em.”

After all the others had ordered their
breakfasts without so much as a please (which
annoyed Bilbo very much), they all got up. The
hobbit had to find room for them all, and filled all
his spare-rooms and made beds on chairs and



sofas, before he got them all stowed and went
to his own little bed very tired and not altogether
happy. One thing he did make his mind up
about was not to bother to get up very early and
cook everybody else’s wretched breakfast. The
Tookishness was wearing off, and he was not
now quite so sure that he was going on any
journey in the morning.

As he lay in bed he could hear Thorin still
humming to himself in the best bedroom next to
him:


Far over the misty mountains cold
To dungeons deep and caverns old
We must away, ere break of day,

To find our long-forgotten gold.


Bilbo went to sleep with that in his ears, and
it gave him very uncomfortable dreams. It was
long after the break of day, when he woke up.




Chapter II


ROAST MUTTON


Up jumped Bilbo, and putting on his dressing-
gown went into the dining-room. There he saw
nobody, but all the signs of a large and hurried
breakfast. There was a fearful mess in the
room, and piles of unwashed crocks in the
kitchen. Nearly every pot and pan he
possessed seemed to have been used. The
washing-up was so dismally real that Bilbo was
forced to believe the party of the night before
had not been part of his bad dreams, as he had
rather hoped. Indeed he was really relieved
after all to think that they had all gone without
him, and without bothering to wake him up (“but
with never a thank-you” he thought); and yet in a
way he could not help feeling just a trifle
disappointed. The feeling surprised him.

“Don't be a fool. Bilbo Baggins!” he said to
himself, “thinking of dragons and all that
outlandish nonsense at your age!” So he put on
an apron, lit fires, boiled water, and washed up.
Then he had a nice little breakfast in the kitchen
before turning out the dining-room. By that time
the sun was shining; and the front door was
open, letting in a warm spring breeze. Bilbo
began to whistle loudly and to forget about the
night before. In fact he was just sitting down to a


nice little second breakfast in the dining-room
by the open window, when in walked Gandalf.

“My dear fellow,” said he, “whenever are
you going to come? What about an early start?
— and here you are having breakfast, or
whatever you call it, at half past ten! They left
you the message, because they could not wait.”

“What message?” said poor Mr. Baggins all
in a fluster.

“Great Elephants!” said Gandalf, “you are
not at all yourself this morning — you have never
dusted the mantelpiece!”

“What's that got to do with it? I have had
enough to do with washing up for fourteen!”

“If you had dusted the mantelpiece, you
would have found this just under the clock,” said
Gandalf, handing Bilbo a note (written, of
course, on his own note-paper).

This is what he read:


“Thorin and Company to Burglar Bilbo
greeting! For your hospitality our sincerest
thanks, and for your offer of professional
assistance our grateful acceptance. Terms:
cash on delivery, up to and not exceeding one
fourteenth of total profits (if any); all travelling
expenses guaranteed in any event; funeral
expenses to be defrayed by us or our
representatives, if occasion arises and the
matter is not otherwise arranged for.

“Thinking it unnecessary to disturb your
esteemed repose, we have proceeded in
advance to make requisite preparations, and
shall await your respected person at the Green



Dragon Inn, Bywater, at 11 a.m. sharp. Trusting
that you will be punctual,

“ We have the honour to remain
“ Yours deeply
“ Thorin & Co.”

“That leaves you just ten minutes. You will
have to run,” said Gandalf.

“But — ,” said Bilbo.

“No time for it,” said the wizard.

“But — ,” said Bilbo again.

“No time for that either! Off you go!”

To the end of his days Bilbo could never
remember how he found himself outside,
without a hat, a walking-stick or any money, or
anything that he usually took when he went out;
leaving his second breakfast half-finished and
quite unwashed-up, pushing his keys into
Gandalf s hands, and running as fast as his furry
feet could carry him down the lane, past the
great Mill, across The Water, and then on for a
mile or more.

Very puffed he was, when he got to Bywater
just on the stroke of eleven, and found he had
come without a pocket-handkerchief!

“Bravo!” said Balin who was standing at the
inn door looking out for him.

Just then all the others came round the
corner of the road from the village. They were
on ponies, and each pony was slung about with
all kinds of baggages, packages, parcels, and
paraphernalia. There was a very small pony,
apparently for Bilbo.

“Up you two get, and off we go!” said
Thorin.

“I'm awfully sorry,” said Bilbo, “but I have



come without my hat, and I have left my pocket-
handkerchief behind, and I haven't got any
money. I didn't get your note until after 10.45 to
be precise.”

“Don't be precise,” said Dwalin, “and don't
worry! You will have to manage without pocket-
handkerchiefs, and a good many other things,
before you get to the journey’s end. As for a hat,

I have got a spare hood and cloak in my
luggage.”

That's how they all came to start, jogging off
from the inn one fine morning just before May,
on laden ponies; and Bilbo was wearing a dark-
green hood (a little weather-stained) and a
dark-green cloak borrowed from Dwalin. They
were too large for him, and he looked rather
comic. What his father Bungo would have
thought of him, I daren't think. His only comfort
was he couldn't be mistaken for a dwarf, as he
had no beard.

They had not been riding very long, when up
came Gandalf very splendid on a white horse.
He had brought a lot of pocket-handkerchiefs,
and Bilbo's pipe and tobacco. So after that the
party went along very merrily, and they told
stories or sang songs as they rode forward all
day, except of course when they stopped for
meals. These didn't come quite as often as
Bilbo would have liked them, but still he began
to feel that adventures were not so bad after all.

At first they had passed through hobbit-
lands, a wide respectable country inhabited by
decent folk, with good roads, an inn or two, and
now and then a dwarf or a farmer ambling by on
business. Then they came to lands where



people spoke strangely, and sang songs Bilbo
had never heard before. Now they had gone on
far into the Lone-lands, where there were no
people left, no inns, and the roads grew steadily
worse. Not far ahead were dreary hills, rising
higher and higher, dark with trees. On some of
them were old castles with an evil look, as if
they had been built by wicked people.
Everything seemed gloomy, for the weather that
day had taken a nasty turn. Mostly it had been
as good as May can be, can be, even in merry
tales, but now it was cold and wet. In the Lone-
lands they had been obliged to camp when they
could, but at least it had been dry.

“To think it will soon be June!” grumbled
Bilbo, as he splashed along behind the others
in a very muddy track. It was after tea-time; it
was pouring with rain, and had been all day; his
hood was dripping into his eyes, his cloak was
full of water; the pony was tired and stumbled on
stones; the others were too grumpy to talk. “And
I'm sure the rain has got into the dry clothes and
into the food-bags,” thought Bilbo. “Bother
burgling and everything to do with it! I wish I was
at home in my nice hole by the fire, with the
kettle just beginning to sing!” It was not the last
time that he wished that!

Still the dwarves jogged on, never turning
round or taking any notice of the hobbit.
Somewhere behind the grey clouds the sun
must have gone down, for it began to get dark
as they went down into a deep valley with a river
at the bottom. Wind got up, and willows along
its banks bent and sighed. Fortunately the road
went over an ancient stone bridge, for the river,



swollen with the rains, came rushing down from
the hills and mountains in the north.

It was nearly night when they had crossed
over. The wind broke up the grey clouds, and a
wandering moon appeared above the hills
between the flying rags. Then they stopped, and
Thorin muttered something about supper, “and
where shall we get a dry patch to sleep on?”

Not until then did they notice that Gandalf
was missing. So far he had come all the way
with them, never saying if he was in the
adventure or merely keeping them company for
a while. He had eaten most, talked most, and
laughed most. But now he simply was not there
at all!


“Just when a wizard would have been most
useful, too,” groaned Dori and Nori (who shared
the hobbit's views about regular meals, plenty
and often).

They decided in the end that they would
have to camp where they were. They moved to
a clump of trees, and though it was drier under
them, the wind shook the rain off the leaves,
and the drip, drip, was most annoying. Also the
mischief seemed to have got into the fire.
Dwarves can make a fire almost anywhere out
of almost anything, wind or no wind; but they
could not do it that night, not even Oin and
Gloin, who were specially good at it.

Then one of the ponies took fright at nothing
and bolted. He got into the river before they
could catch him; and before they could get him
out again, Fili and Kili were nearly drowned,



and all the baggage that he carried was
washed away off him. Of course it was mostly
food, and there was mighty little left for supper,
and less for breakfast.

There they all sat glum and wet and
muttering, while Oin and Gloin went on trying to
light the fire, and quarrelling about it. Bilbo was
sadly reflecting that adventures are not all pony-
rides in May-sunshine, when Balin, who was
always their look-out man, said: “There's a light
over there!” There was a hill some way off with
trees on it, pretty thick in parts. Out of the dark
mass of the trees they could now see a light
shining, a reddish comfortable-looking light, as
it might be a fire or torches twinkling.

When they had looked at it for some while,
they fell to arguing. Some said “no” and some
said “yes”. Some said they could but go and
see, and anything was better than little supper,
less breakfast, and wet clothes all the night.

Others said: “These parts are none too well
known, and are too near the mountains.
Travellers seldom come this way now. The old
maps are no use: things have changed for the
worse and the road is unguarded. They have
seldom even heard of the king round here, and
the less inquisitive you are as you go along, the
less trouble you are likely to find.” Some said:
“After all there are fourteen of us.” Others said:
“Where has Gandalf got to?” This remark was
repeated by everybody. Then the rain began to
pour down worse than ever, and Oin and Gloin
began to fight.

That settled it. “After all we have got a
burglar with us,” they said; and so they made



off, leading their ponies (with all due and proper
caution) in the direction of the light. They came
to the hill and were soon in the wood. Up the hill
they went; but there was no proper path to be
seen, such as might lead to a house or a farm;
and do what they could they made a deal of
rustling and crackling and creaking (and a good
deal of grumbling and drafting), as they went
through the trees in the pitch dark.

Suddenly the red light shone out very bright
through the tree-trunks not far ahead.

“Now it is the burglar’s turn,” they said,
meaning Bilbo. “You must go on and find out all
about that light, and what it is for, and if all is
perfectly safe and canny,” said Thorin to the
hobbit. “Now scuttle off, and come back quick, if
all is well. If not, come back if you can! If you
can't, hoot twice like a barn-owl and once like a
screech-owl, and we will do what we can.”

Off Bilbo had to go, before he could explain
that he could not hoot even once like any kind of
owl any more than fly like a bat. But at any rate
hobbits can move quietly in woods, absolutely
quietly. They take a pride in it, and Bilbo had
sniffed more than once at what he called “all this
dwarvish racket,” as they went along, though I
don’t suppose you or I would have noticed
anything at all on a windy night, not if the whole
cavalcade had passed two feet off. As for Bilbo
walking primly towards the red light, I don't
suppose even a weasel would have stirred a
whisker at it. So, naturally, he got right up to the
fire — for fire it was — without disturbing anyone.
And this is what he saw.

Three very large persons sitting round a



very large fire of beech-logs. They were
toasting mutton on long spits of wood, and
licking the gravy off their fingers. There was a
fine toothsome smell. Also there was a barrel of
good drink at hand, and they were drinking out
of jugs. But they were trolls. Obviously trolls.
Even Bilbo, in spite of his sheltered life, could
see that: from the great heavy faces of them,
and theirsize, and the shape oftheirlegs, not to
mention their language, which was not drawing-
room fashion at all, at all.

“Mutton yesterday, mutton today, and
blimey, if it don't look like mutton again
tomorrer,” said one of the trolls.

“Never a blinking bit of manflesh have we
had for long enough,” said a second. “What the
'ell William was a-thinkin' of to bring us into
these parts at all, beats me — and the drink
runnin' short, what's more,” he said jogging the
elbow of William, who was taking a pull at his

jug.

William choked. “Shut yer mouth!” he said
as soon as he could. “Yer can't expect folk to
stop here for ever just to be et by you and Bert.
You've et a village and a half between yer, since
we come down from the mountains. How much
more d'yer want? And time's been up our way
when yer'd have said ‘thank yer Bill’ for a nice
bit o’ fat valley mutton like what this is.” He took
a big bite off a sheep's leg he was roasting,
and wiped his lips on his sleeve.

Yes, I am afraid trolls do behave like that,
even those with only one head each. After
hearing all this Bilbo ought to have done
something at once. Either he should have gone



back quietly and warned his friends that there
were three fair-sized trolls at hand in a nasty
mood, quite likely to try roasted dwarf, or even
pony, for a change; or else he should have done
a bit of good quick burgling. A really first-class
and legendary burglar would at this point have
picked the trolls’ pockets — it is nearly always
worth while, if you can manage it — , pinched the
very mutton off the spits, purloined the beer, and
walked off without their noticing him. Others
more practical but with less professional pride
would perhaps have stuck a dagger into each
of them before they observed it. Then the night
could have been spent cheerily.

Bilbo knew it. He had read of a good many
things he had never seen or done. He was very
much alarmed, as well as disgusted; he wished
himself a hundred miles away, and yet — and yet
somehow he could not go straight back to
Thorin and Company emptyhanded. So he
stood and hesitated in the shadows. Of the
various burglarious proceedings he had heard
of picking the trolls' pockets seemed the least
difficult, so at last he crept behind a tree just
behind William.

Bert and Tom went off to the barrel. William
was having another drink. Then Bilbo plucked
up courage and put his little hand in William's
enormous pocket. There was a purse in it, as
big as a bag to Bilbo. “Ha!” thought he,
warming to his new work as he lifted it carefully
out, “this is a beginning!”

It was! Trolls' purses are the mischief, and
this was no exception. “’Ere, 'oo are you?” it
squeaked, as it left the pocket; and William



turned round at once and grabbed Bilbo by the
neck, before he could duck behind the tree.

“Blimey, Bert, look what I’ve copped!” said
William.

“What is it?” said the others coming up.

“Lumme, if I knows! What are yer?”

“Bilbo Baggins, a bur — a hobbit,” said poor
Bilbo, shaking all over, and wondering how to
make owl-noises before they throttled him.

“A burrahobbit?” said they a bit startled.
Trolls are slow in the uptake, and mighty
suspicious about anything new to them.

“What's a burrahobbit got to do with my
pocket, anyways?” said William.

“And can yer cook 'em?” said Tom.

“Yer can try," said Bert, picking up a
skewer.

“He wouldn't make above a mouthful,” said
William, who had already had a fine supper,
“not when he was skinned and boned.”

“P'raps there are more like him round
about, and we might make a pie,” said Bert.
“Here you, are there any more of your sort a-
sneakin' in these here woods, yer nassty little
rabbit,” said he looking at the hobbit's furry feet;
and he picked him up by the toes and shook
him.

“Yes, lots,” said Bilbo, before he
remembered not to give his friends away. “No
none at all, not one,” he said immediately
afterwards.

“What d'yer mean?” said Bert, holding him
right way up, bythe hairthis time.

“What I say,” said Bilbo gasping. “And
please don't cook me, kind sirs! I am a good



cook myself, and cook better than I cook, if you
see what I mean. I’ll cook beautifully for you, a
perfectly beautiful breakfast for you, if only you
won't have me for supper.”

“Poor little blighter,” said William. He had
already had as much supper as he could hold;
also he had had lots of beer. “Poor little
blighter! Let him go!”

“Not till he says what he means by lots and
none at all," said Bert. “I don't want to have me
throat cut in me sleep! Hold his toes in the fire,
till he talks!”

“I won’t have it,” said William. “I caught him
anyway.”

“You're a fat fool, William,” said Bert, “as
I've said afore this evening.”

“And you're a lout!”

“And I won't take that from you, Bill
Huggins,” says Bert, and puts his fist in
William's eye.

Then there was a gorgeous row. Bilbo had
just enough wits left, when Bert dropped him on
the ground, to scramble out of the way of their
feet, before they were fighting like dogs, and
calling one another all sorts of perfectly true and
applicable names in very loud voices. Soon
they were locked in one another’s arms, and
rolling nearly into the fire kicking and thumping,
while Tom whacked at them both with a branch
to bring them to their senses — and that of
course only made them madder than ever.

That would have been the time for Bilbo to
have left. But his poor little feet had been very
squashed in Bert's big paw, and he had no
breath in his body, and his head was going



round; so there he lay for a while panting, just
outside the circle of firelight.

Right in the middle of the fight up came
Balin. The dwarves had heard noises from a
distance, and after waiting for some time for
Bilbo to come back, or to hoot like an owl, they
started off one by one to creep towards the light
as quietly as they could. No sooner did Tom
see Balin come into the light than he gave an
awful howl. Trolls simply detest the very sight of
dwarves (uncooked). Bert and Bill stopped
fighting immediately, and “a sack, Tom, quick!”
they said. Before Balin, who was wondering
where in all this commotion Bilbo was, knew
what was happening, a sack was over his head,
and he was down.

“There's more to come yet,” said Tom, “or
I'm mighty mistook. Lots and none at all, it is,”
said he. “No burrahobbits, but lots of these here
dwarves. That's about the shape of it!”

“I reckon you’re right,” said Bert, “and we’d
best get out of the light.”

And so they did. With sacks in their hands,
that they used for carrying off mutton and other
plunder, they waited in the shadows. As each
dwarf came up and looked at the fire, and the
spilled jugs, and the gnawed mutton, in
surprise, pop! went a nasty smelly sack over his
head, and he was down. Soon Dwalin lay by
Balin, and Fili and Kili together, and Dori and
Nori and Ori all in a heap, and Oin and Gloin
and Bifur and Bofur and Bombur piled
uncomfortably near the fire.

“That’ll teach 'em,” said Tom; for Bifur and
Bombur had given a lot of trouble, and fought



[ike mad, as dwarves will when cornered.

Thorin came last — and he was not caught
unawares. He came expecting mischief, and
didn't need to see his friends' legs sticking out
of sacks to tell him that things were not all well.
He stood outside in the shadows some way off,
and said: “What's all this trouble? Who has
been knocking my people about?”

“It's trolls!” said Bilbo from behind a tree.
They had forgotten all about him. “They’re
hiding in the bushes with sacks,” said he.

“O! are they?” said Thorin, and he jumped
forward to the fire, before they could leap on
him. He caught up a big branch all on fire at one
end: and Bert got that end in his eye before he
could step aside. That put him out of the battle
for a bit. Bilbo did his best. He caught hold of
Tom’s leg — as well as he could, it was thick as
a young tree-trunk — but he was sent spinning
up into the top of some bushes, when Tom
kicked the sparks up in Thorin's face.




The Trolls




Tom got the branch in his teeth for that, and
lost one of the front ones. It made him howl, I
can tell you. But just at that moment William
came up behind and popped a sack right over
Thorin's head and down to his toes. And so the
fight ended. A nice pickle they were all in now:
all neatly tied up in sacks, with three angry trolls
(and two with burns and bashes to remember)
sitting by them, arguing whether they should
roast them slowly, or mince them fine and boil
them, or just sit on them one by one and squash
them into jelly; and Bilbo up in a bush, with his
clothes and his skin torn, not daring to move for
fear they should hear him.


It was just then that Gandalf came back. But no
one saw him. The trolls had just decided to
roast the dwarves now and eat them later — that
was Bert's idea, and after a lot of argument they
had all agreed to it.

“No good roasting 'em now, it'd take all
night,” said a voice. Bert thought it was
William's.

“Don't start the argument all over again,
Bill,” he said, “or it wll take all night.”

“Who's a-arguing?” said William, who
thought it was Bert that had spoken.

“You are,” said Bert.

“You’re a liar,” said William; and so the
argument began all over again. In the end they
decided to mince them fine and boil them. So
they got a great black pot, and they took out
their knives.

“No good boiling 'em! We ain't got no



water, and it's a long way to the well and all,”
said a voice. Bert and William thought it was
Tom’s.

“Shut up!” said they, “or we'll never have
done. And yer can fetch the water yerself, if yer
say any more.”

“Shut up yerself!” said Tom, who thought it
was William's voice. “Who’s arguing but you, I’d
like to know.”

“You’re a booby,” said William.

“Booby yerself!” said Tom.

And so the argument began all over again,
and went on hotter than ever, until at last they
decided to sit on the sacks one by one and
squash them, and boil them next time.

“Who shall we sit on first?” said the voice.

“Better sit on the last fellow first,” said Bert,
whose eye had been damaged by Thorin. He
thought Tom was talking.

“Don't talk to yerself!” said Tom. “But if you
wants to sit on the last one, sit on him. Which is
he?”

“The one with the yellow stockings," said
Bert.

“Nonsense, the one with the grey
stockings,” said a voice like William's.

“I made sure it was yellow,” said Bert.

“Yellow it was,” said William.

“Then what did yer say it was grey for?”
said Bert.

“I never did. Tom said it.”

“That I never did!” said Tom. “It was you.”

“Two to one, so shut yer mouth!” said Bert.

“Who are you a-talkin' to?” said William.

“Now stop it!” said Tom and Bert together.



“The night's gettin’ on, and dawn comes early.
Let's get on with it!”

“Dawn take you all, and be stone to you!”
said a voice that sounded like William’s. But it
wasn't. For just at that moment the light came
over the hill, and there was a mighty twitter in
the branches. William never spoke for he stood
turned to stone as he stooped; and Bert and
Tom were stuck like rocks as they looked at
him. And there they stand to this day, all alone,
unless the birds perch on them; for trolls, as you
probably know, must be underground before
dawn, or they go back to the stuff of the
mountains they are made of, and never move
again. That is what had happened to Bert and
Tom and William.

“Excellent!” said Gandalf, as he stepped
from behind a tree, and helped Bilbo to climb
down out of a thorn-bush. Then Bilbo
understood. It was the wizard's voice that had
kept the trolls bickering and quarrelling, until the
light came and made an end of them.

The next thing was to untie the sacks and let
out the dwarves. They were nearly suffocated,
and very annoyed: they had not at all enjoyed
lying there listening to the trolls making plans for
roasting them and squashing them and mincing
them. They had to hear Bilbo's account of what
had happened to him twice over, before they
were satisfied.

“Silly time to go practising pinching and
pocket-picking,” said Bombur, “when what we
wanted was fire and food!”

“And that’s just what you wouldn't have got
of those fellows without a struggle, in any case,”



said Gandalf. “Anyhow you are wasting time
now. Don't you realize that the trolls must have a
cave or a hole dug somewhere near to hide
from the sun in? We must look into it!”

They searched about, and soon found the
marks of trolls' stony boots going away through
the trees. They followed the tracks up the hill,
until hidden by bushes they came on a big door
of stone leading to a cave. But they could not
open it, not though they all pushed while
Gandalf tried various incantations.

“Would this be any good?” asked Bilbo,
when they were getting tired and angry. “I found
it on the ground where the trolls had their fight.”
He held out a largish key, though no doubt
William had thought it very small and secret. It
must have fallen out of his pocket, very luckily,
before he was turned to stone.

“Why on earth didn't you mention it before?”
they cried. Gandalf grabbed it and fitted it into
the keyhole. Then the stone door swung back
with one big push, and they all went inside.
There were bones on the floor and a nasty smell
was in the air; but there was a good deal of
food jumbled carelessly on shelves and on the
ground, among an untidy litter of plunder, of all
sorts from brass buttons to pots full of gold
coins standing in a corner. There were lots of
clothes, too, hanging on the walls — too small for
trolls, I am afraid they belonged to victims — and
among them were several swords of various
makes, shapes, and sizes. Two caught their
eyes particularly, because of their beautiful
scabbards and jewelled hilts.

Gandalf and Thorin each took one of these;



and Bilbo took a knife in a leather sheath. It
would have made only a tiny pocket-knife for a
troll, but it was as good as a short sword for the
hobbit.

“These look like good blades,” said the
wizard, half drawing them and looking at them
curiously. “They were not made by any troll, nor
by any smith among men in these parts and
days; but when we can read the runes on them,
we shall know more about them.”

“Let's get out of this horrible smell!” said
Fili. So they carried out the pots of coins, and
such food as was untouched and looked fit to
eat, also one barrel of ale which was still full. By
that time they felt like breakfast, and being very
hungry they did not turn their noses up at what
they had got from the trolls’ larder. Their own
provisions were very scanty. Now they had
bread and cheese, and plenty of ale, and bacon
to toast in the embers of the fire.

After that they slept, for their night had been
disturbed; and they did nothing more till the
afternoon. Then they brought up their ponies,
and carried away the pots of gold, and buried
them very secretly not far from the track by the
river, putting a great many spells over them, just
in case they ever had the chance to come back
and recover them. When that was done, they all
mounted once more, and jogged along again
on the path towards the East.

“Where did you go to, if I may ask?” said
Thorin to Gandalf as they rode along.

“To look ahead,” said he.

“And what brought you back in the nick of
time?”



“Looking behind,” said he.

“Exactly!” said Thorin; “but could you be
more plain?”

“I went on to spy out our road. It will soon
become dangerous and difficult. Also I was
anxious about replenishing our small stock of
provisions. I had not gone very far, however,
when I met a couple of friends of mine from
Rivendell.”

“Where's that?” asked Bilbo.

“Don't interrupt!” said Gandalf. “You will get
there in a few days now, if we’re lucky, and find
out all about it. As I was saying I met two of
Elrond's people. They were hurrying along for
fear of the trolls. It was they who told me that
three of them had come down from the
mountains and settled in the woods not far from
the road: they had frightened everyone away
from the district, and they waylaid strangers.

“I immediately had a feeling that I was
wanted back. Looking behind I saw a fire in the
distance and made for it. So now you know.
Please be more careful, next time, or we shall
never get anywhere!”

“Thank you!” said Thorin.




Chapter III


A SHORT REST


They did not sing or tell stories that day, even
though the weather improved; nor the next day,
nor the day after. They had begun to feel that
danger was not far away on either side. They
camped under the stars, and their horses had
more to eat than they had; for there was plenty
of grass, but there was not much in their bags,
even with what they had got from the trolls. One
morning they forded a river at a wide shallow
place full of the noise of stones and foam. The
far bank was steep and slippery. When they got
to the top of it, leading their ponies, they saw
that the great mountains had marched down
very near to them. Already they seemed only a
day’s easy journey from the feet of the nearest.
Dark and drear it looked, though there were
patches of sunlight on its brown sides, and
behind its shoulders the tips of snow-peaks
gleamed.


“Is that The Mountain?” asked Bilbo in a
solemn voice, looking at it with round eyes. He
had never seen a thing that looked so big
before.

“Of course not!” said Balin. “That is only the
beginning of the Misty Mountains, and we have
got to get through, or over, or under those
somehow, before we can come into Wilderland
beyond. And it is a deal of a way even from the
other side of them to the Lonely Mountain in the
East where Smaug lies on our treasure.”

“O!” said Bilbo, and just at that moment he
felt more tired than he ever remembered feeling
before. He was thinking once again of his
comfortable chair before the fire in his favourite
sitting-room in his hobbit-hole, and of the kettle
singing. Not for the last time!


Now Gandalf led the way. “We must not miss
the road, or we shall be done for,” he said. “We
need food, for one thing, and rest in reasonable
safety — also it is very necessary to tackle the
Misty Mountains by the proper path, or else you
will get lost in them, and have to come back and
start at the beginning again (if you ever get
back at all).”

They asked him where he was making for,



and he answered: “You are come to the very
edge of the Wild, as some of you may know.
Hidden somewhere ahead of us is the fair
valley of Rivendell where Elrond lives in the Last
Homely House. I sent a message by my friends,
and we are expected.”

That sounded nice and comforting, but they
had not got there yet, and it was not so easy as
it sounds to find the Last Homely House west of
the Mountains. There seemed to be no trees
and no valleys and no hills to break the ground
in front of them, only one vast slope going slowly
up and up to meet the feet of the nearest
mountain, a wide land the colour of heather and
crumbling rock, with patches and slashes of
grass-green and moss-green showing where
water might be.

Morning passed, afternoon came; but in all
the silent waste there was no sign of any
dwelling. They were growing anxious, for they
saw now that the house might be hidden almost
anywhere between them and the mountains.
They came on unexpected valleys, narrow with
steep sides, that opened suddenly at their feet,
and they looked down surprised to see trees
below them and running water at the bottom.
There were gullies that they could almost leap
over, but very deep with waterfalls in them.
There were dark ravines that one could neither



jump over nor climb into. There were bogs,
some of them green pleasant places to look at,
with flowers growing bright and tall; but a pony
that walked there with a pack on its back would
never have come out again.

It was indeed a much wider land from the
ford to the mountains than ever you would have
guessed. Bilbo was astonished. The only path
was marked with white stones, some of which
were small, and others were half covered with
moss or heather. Altogether it was a very slow
business following the track, even guided by
Gandalf, who seemed to know his way about
pretty well.

His head and beard wagged this way and
that as he looked for the stones, and they
followed his lead, but they seemed no nearer to
the end of the search when the day began to
fail. Tea-time had long gone by, and it seemed
supper-time would soon do the same. There
were moths fluttering about, and the light
became very dim, for the moon had not risen.
Bilbo’s pony began to stumble over roots and
stones. They came to the edge of a steep fall in
the ground so suddenly that Gandalfs horse
nearly slipped down the slope.

“Here it is at last!” he called, and the others
gathered round him and looked over the edge.
They saw a valley far below. They could hear



the voice of hurrying water in a rocky bed at the
bottom; the scent of trees was in the air; and
there was a light on the valley-side across the
water.

Bilbo never forgot the way they slithered
and slipped in the dusk down the steep zig-zag
path into the secret valley of Rivendell. The air
grew warmer as they got lower, and the smell of
the pine-trees made him drowsy, so that every
now and again he nodded and nearly fell off, or
bumped his nose on the pony’s neck. Their
spirits rose as they went down and down. The
trees changed to beech and oak, and there was
a comfortable feeling in the twilight. The last
green had almost faded out of the grass, when
they came at length to an open glade not far
above the banks of the stream.

“Hmmm! it smells like elves!” thought Bilbo,
and he looked up at the stars. They were
burning bright and blue. Just then there came a
burst of song like laughter in the trees:


O! What are you doing,

And where are you going?
Your ponies need shoeing!
The river is flowing!

O! tra-la-la-lally
here down in the valley!



O! What are you seeking,
And where are you making?
The faggots are reeking,

The bannocks are baking!
0! tril-lil-lil-lolly
the valley is jolly,
ha! ha!


0! Where are you going
With beards all a-wagging?
No knowing, no knowing
What brings Mister Baggins
And Balin and Dwalin
down into the valley
in June
ha! ha!


0! Will you be staying,

Or will you be flying?
Your ponies are straying!
The daylight is dying!



To fly would be folly,

To stay would be jolly
And listen and hark
Till the end of the dark
to our tune
ha! ha!


So they laughed and sang in the trees; and
pretty fair nonsense I daresay you think it. Not
that they would care; they would only laugh all
the more if you told them so. They were elves of
course. Soon Bilbo caught glimpses of them as
the darkness deepened. He loved elves, though
he seldom met them; but he was a little
frightened of them too. Dwarves don’t get on
well with them. Even decent enough dwarves
like Thorin and his friends think them foolish
(which is a very foolish thing to think), or get
annoyed with them. For some elves tease them
and laugh at them, and most of all at their
beards.

“Well, well!” said a voice. “Just look! Bilbo
the hobbit on a pony, my dear! Isn’t it delicious!”

“Most astonishing wonderful!”

Then off they went into another song as
ridiculous as the one I have written down in full.
At last one, a tall young fellow, came out from
the trees and bowed to Gandalf and to Thorin.



“Welcome to the valley!” he said.

“Thank you!” said Thorin a bit gruffly; but
Gandalf was already off his horse and among
the elves, talking merrily with them.

“You are a little out of your way,” said the elf:
“that is, if you are making for the only path
across the water and to the house beyond. We
will set you right, but you had best get on foot,
until you are over the bridge. Are you going to
stay a bit and sing with us, or will you go straight
on? Supper is preparing over there,” he said. “I
can smell the wood-fires for the cooking.”

Tired as he was, Bilbo would have liked to
stay a while. Elvish singing is not a thing to
miss, in June under the stars, not if you care for
such things. Also he would have liked to have a
few private words with these people that
seemed to know his names and all about him,
although he had never seen them before. He
thought their opinion of his adventure might be
interesting. Elves know a lot and are wondrous
folk for news, and know what is going on among
the peoples of the land, as quick as water flows,
or quicker.

But the dwarves were all for supper as soon
as possible just then, and would not stay. On
they all went, leading their ponies, till they were
brought to a good path and so at last to the very
brink of the river. It was flowing fast and noisily,



as mountain-streams do of a summer evening,
when sun has been all day on the snow far up
above. There was only a narrow bridge of stone
without a parapet, as narrow as a pony could
well walk on; and over that they had to go, slow
and careful, one by one, each leading his pony
by the bridle. The elves had brought bright
lanterns to the shore, and they sang a merry
song as the party went across.

“Don’t dip your beard in the foam, father!”
they cried to Thorin, who was bent almost on to
his hands and knees. “It is long enough without
watering it.”

“Mind Bilbo doesn’t eat all the cakes!” they
called. "He is too fat to get through key-holes
yet!”

“Hush, hush! Good People! and good
night!” said Gandalf, who came last. “Valleys
have ears, and some elves have over merry
tongues. Good night!”

And so at last they all came to the Last
Homely House, and found its doors flung wide.


Now it is a strange thing, but things that are
good to have and days that are good to spend
are soon told about, and not much to listen to;
while things that are uncomfortable, palpitating,



and even gruesome, may make a good tale,
and take a deal of telling anyway. They stayed
long in that good house, fourteen days at least,
and they found it hard to leave. Bilbo would
gladly have stopped there for ever and ever —
even supposing a wish would have taken him
right back to his hobbit-hole without trouble. Yet
there is little to tell about their stay.

The master of the house was an elf-friend —
one of those people whose fathers came into
the strange stories before the beginning of
History, the wars of the evil goblins and the
elves and the first men in the North. In those
days of our tale there were still some people
who had both elves and heroes of the North for
ancestors, and Elrond the master of the house
was their chief.

He was as noble and as fair in face as an
elf-lord, as strong as a warrior, as wise as a
wizard, as venerable as a king of dwarves, and
as kind as summer. He comes into many tales,
but his part in the story of Bilbo’s great
adventure is only a small one, though important,
as you will see, if we ever get to the end of it.
His house was perfect, whether you liked food,
or sleep, or work, or story-telling, or singing, or
just sitting and thinking best, or a pleasant
mixture of them all. Evil things did not come into
that valley.



I wish I had time to tell you even a few of the
tales or one or two of the songs that they heard
in that house. All of them, the ponies as well,
grew refreshed and strong in a few days there.
Their clothes were mended as well as their
bruises, their tempers and their hopes. Their
bags were filled with food and provisions light
to carry but strong to bring them over the
mountain passes. Their plans were improved
with the best advice. So the time came to
midsummer eve, and they were to go on again
with the early sun on midsummer morning.

Elrond knew all about runes of every kind.
That day he looked at the swords they had
brought from the trolls’ lair, and he said: “These
are not troll-make. They are old swords, very old
swords of the High Elves of the West, my kin.
They were made in Gondolin for the Goblin-
wars. They must have come from a dragon’s
hoard or goblin plunder, for dragons and
goblins destroyed that city many ages ago.
This, Thorin, the runes name Orcrist, the Goblin-
cleaver in the ancient tongue of Gondolin; it was
a famous blade. This, Gandalf, was Glamdring,
Foe-hammer that the king of Gondolin once
wore. Keep them well!”

“Whence did the trolls get them, I wonder?”
said Thorin looking at his sword with new
interest.



“I could not say,” said Elrond, “but one may
guess that your trolls had plundered other
plunderers, or come on the remnants of old
robberies in some hold in the mountains. I have
heard that there are still forgotten treasures of
old to be found in the deserted caverns of the
mines of Moria, since the dwarf and goblin
war.”

Thorin pondered these words. “I will keep
this sword in honour,” he said. “May it soon
cleave goblins once again!”

“A wish that is likely to be granted soon
enough in the mountains!” said Elrond. “But
show me now your map!”

He took it and gazed long at it, and he
shook his head; for if he did not altogether
approve of dwarves and their love of gold, he
hated dragons and their cruel wickedness, and
he grieved to remember the ruin of the town of
Dale and its merry bells, and the burned banks
of the bright River Running. The moon was
shining in a broad silver crescent. He held up
the map and the white light shone through it.
“What is this?” he said. “There are moon-letters
here, beside the plain runes which say ‘five feet
high the door and three may walk abreast.’”

“What are moon-letters?” asked the hobbit
full of excitement. He loved maps, as I have told
you before; and he also liked runes and letters



and cunning handwriting, though when he wrote
himself it was a bit thin and spidery.

“Moon-letters are rune-letters, but you
cannot see them,” said Elrond, “not when you
look straight at them. They can only be seen
when the moon shines behind them, and what is
more, with the more cunning sort it must be a
moon of the same shape and season as the
day when they were written. The dwarves
invented them and wrote them with silver pens,
as your friends could tell you. These must have
been written on a midsummer’s eve in a
crescent moon, a long while ago.”

“What do they say?” asked Gandalf and
Thorin together, a bit vexed perhaps that even
Elrond should have found this out first, though
really there had not been a chance before, and
there would not have been another until
goodness knows when.

“Stand by the grey stone when the thrush

knocks. ” read Elrond, “and the setting sun with
the last light of Durin’s Day will shine upon the
key-hole.”

“Durin, Durin!” said Thorin. “He was the
father of the fathers of the eldest race of
Dwarves, the Longbeards, and my first
ancestor: I am his heir.”

“Then what is Durin’s Day?” asked Elrond.

“The first day of the dwarves’ New Year,”


said Thorin, “is as all should know the first day
of the last moon of Autumn on the threshold of
Winter. We still call it Durin’s Day when the last
moon of Autumn and the sun are in the sky
together. But this will not help us much, I fear, for
it passes our skill in these days to guess when
such a time will come again.”

“That remains to be seen,” said Gandalf. “Is
there any more writing?”

"None to be seen by this moon,” said
Elrond, and he gave the map back to Thorin;
and then they went down to the water to see the
elves dance and sing upon the midsummer’s
eve.

The next morning was a midsummer’s
morning as fair and fresh as could be dreamed:
blue sky and never a cloud, and the sun dancing
on the water. Now they rode away amid songs
of farewell and good speed, with their hearts
ready for more adventure, and with a
knowledge of the road they must follow over the
Misty Mountains to the land beyond.




Chapter IV


OVER HILL AND UNDER HILL


There were many paths that led up into those
mountains, and many passes over them. But
most of the paths were cheats and deceptions
and led nowhere or to bad ends; and most of
the passes were infested by evil things and
dreadful dangers. The dwarves and the hobbit,
helped by the wise advice of Elrond and the
knowledge and memory of Gandalf, took the
right road to the right pass.

Long days after they had climbed out of the
valley and left the Last Homely House miles
behind, they were still going up and up and up. It
was a hard path and a dangerous path, a
crooked way and a lonely and a long. Now they
could look back over the lands they had left, laid
out behind them far below. Far, far away in the
West, where things were blue and faint, Bilbo
knew there lay his own country of safe and
comfortable things, and his little hobbit-hole. He
shivered. It was getting bitter cold up here, and
the wind came shrill among the rocks. Boulders,
too, at times came galloping down the
mountain-sides, let loose by mid-day sun upon


the snow, and passed among them (which was
lucky), or over their heads (which was
alarming). The nights were comfortless and
chill, and they did not dare to sing or talk too
loud, for the echoes were uncanny, and the
silence seemed to dislike being broken —
except by the noise of water and the wail of
wind and the crack of stone.

“The summer is getting on down below,”
thought Bilbo, “and haymaking is going on and
picnics. They will be harvesting and
blackberrying, before we even begin to go
down the other side at this rate.” And the others
were thinking equally gloomy thoughts, although
when they had said good-bye to Elrond in the
high hope of a midsummer morning, they had
spoken gaily of the passage of the mountains,
and of riding swift across the lands beyond.
They had thought of coming to the secret door
in the Lonely Mountain, perhaps that very next
last moon of Autumn — “and perhaps it will be
Durin’s Day” they had said. Only Gandalf had
shaken his head and said nothing. Dwarves
had not passed that way for many years, but
Gandalf had, and he knew how evil and danger
had grown and thriven in the Wild, since the
dragons had driven men from the lands, and the
goblins had spread in secret after the battle of
the Mines of Moria. Even the good plans of
wise wizards like Gandalf and of good friends
like Elrond go astray sometimes when you are
off on dangerous adventures over the Edge of



the Wild; and Gandalf was a wise enough
wizard to know it.


He knew that something unexpected might
happen, and he hardly dared to hope that they
would pass without fearful adventure over those
great tall mountains with lonely peaks and
valleys where no king ruled. They did not. All
was well, until one day they met a thunderstorm
— more than a thunderstorm, a thunder-battle.
You know how terrific a really big thunderstorm
can be down in the land and in a river-valley;
especially at times when two great
thunderstorms meet and clash. More terrible
still are thunder and lightning in the mountains at
night, when storms come up from East and
West and make war. The lightning splinters on
the peaks, and rocks shiver, and great crashes
split the air and go rolling and tumbling into
every cave and hollow; and the darkness is
filled with overwhelming noise and sudden light.

Bilbo had never seen or imagined anything
of the kind. They were high up in a narrow
place, with a dreadful fall into a dim valley at
one side of them. There they were sheltering
under a hanging rock for the night, and he lay
beneath a blanket and shook from head to toe.
When he peeped out in the lightning-flashes, he
saw that across the valley the stone-giants were
out, and were hurling rocks at one another for a
game, and catching them, and tossing them



down into the darkness where they smashed
among the trees far below, or splintered into
little bits with a bang. Then came a wind and a
rain, and the wind whipped the rain and the hail
about in every direction, so that an overhanging
rock was no protection at all. Soon they were
getting drenched and their ponies were
standing with their heads down and their tails
between their legs, and some of them were
whinnying with fright. They could hear the giants
guffawing and shouting all over the
mountainsides.

“This won't do at all!” said Thorin. “If we
don’t get blown off, or drowned, or struck by
lightning, we shall be picked up by some giant
and kicked sky-high for a football.”




The Mountain-path


“Well, if you know of anywhere better, take
us there!” said Gandalf, who was feeling very
grumpy, and was far from happy about the
giants himself.

The end of their argument was that they
sent Fili and Kili to look for a better shelter.
They had very sharp eyes, and being the
youngest of the dwarves by some fifty years
they usually got these sort of jobs (when
everybody could see that it was absolutely no
use sending Bilbo). There is nothing like
looking, if you want to find something (or so
Thorin said to the young dwarves). You certainly
usually find something, if you look, but it is not
always quite the something you were after. So it
proved on this occasion.

Soon Fili and Kili came crawling back,
holding on to the rocks in the wind. “We have
found a dry cave,” they said, “not far round the
next corner; and ponies and all could get
inside.”

“Flave you thoroughly explored it?” said the
wizard, who knew that caves up in the
mountains were seldom unoccupied.

“Yes, yes!” they said, though everybody
knew they could not have been long about it;
they had come back too quick. “It isn't all that
big, and it does not go far back.”

That, of course, is the dangerous part about



caves: you don’t know how far they go back,
sometimes, or where a passage behind may
lead to, or what is waiting for you inside. But
now Fili and Kili’s news seemed good enough.
So they all got up and prepared to move. The
wind was howling and the thunder still growling,
and they had a business getting themselves
and their ponies along. Still it was not very far to
go, and before long they came to a big rock
standing out into the path. If you stepped
behind, you found a low arch in the side of the
mountain. There was just room to get the
ponies through with a squeeze, when they had
been unpacked and unsaddled. As they passed
under the arch, it was good to hear the wind
and the rain outside instead of all about them,
and to feel safe from the giants and their rocks.
But the wizard was taking no risks. He lit up his
wand — as he did that day in Bilbo’s dining-
room that seemed so long ago, if you
remember — , and by its light they explored the
cave from end to end.