They soon found thirteen with room enough
for a dwarf in each. In fact some were too
roomy, and as they climbed in the dwarves



thought anxiously of the shaking and the
bumping they would get inside, though Bilbo did
his best to find straw and other stuff to pack
them in as cosily as could be managed in a
short time. At last twelve dwarves were stowed.
Thorin had given a lot of trouble, and turned and
twisted in his tub and grumbled like a large dog
in a small kennel; while Balin, who came last,
made a great fuss about his air-holes and said
he was stifling, even before his lid was on. Bilbo
had done what he could to close holes in the
sides of the barrels, and to fix on all the lids as
safely as could be managed, and now he was
left alone again, running round putting the
finishing touches to the packing, and hoping
against hope that his plan would come off.

It had not been done a bit too soon. Only a
minute or two after Balin's lid had been fitted on
there came the sound of voices and the flicker
of lights. A number of elves came laughing and
talking into the cellars and singing snatches of
song. They had left a merry feast in one of the
halls and were bent on returning as soon as
they could.

“Where’s old Galion, the butler?” said one.
“I haven’t seen him at the tables tonight. He
ought to be here now to show us what is to be
done.”

“I shall be angry if the old slowcoach is late,”
said another. “I have no wish to waste time
down here while the song is up!”



"Ha, ha!” came a cry. “Here's the old villain
with his head on a jug! He's been having a little
feast all to himself and his friend the captain.”

“Shake him! Wake him!” shouted the others
impatiently.

Galion was not at all pleased at being
shaken or wakened, and still less at being
laughed at. “You’re all late,” he grumbled. “Here
am I waiting and waiting down here, while you
fellows drink and make merry and forget your
tasks. Small wonder if I fall asleep from
weariness!”

“Small wonder,” said they, “when the
explanation stands close at hand in a jug!
Come give us a taste of your sleeping-draught
before we fall to! No need to wake the turnkey
yonder. He has had his share by the looks of it.”

Then they drank once round and became
mighty merry all of a sudden. But they did not
quite lose their wits. “Save us, Galion!” cried
some, “you began your feasting early and
muddled your wits! You have stacked some full
casks here instead of the empty ones, if there is
anything in weight.”

“Get on with the work!” growled the butler.
“There is nothing in the feeling of weight in an
idle toss-pot's arms. These are the ones to go
and no others. Do as I say!”

“Very well, very well,” they answered rolling
the barrels to the opening. “On your head be it,
if the king’s full buttertubs and his best wine is



pushed into the river for the Lake-men to feast
on for nothing!”


Roll — roll — roll — roll,
roll -roll -rolling down the hole!
Heave ho! Splash plump!

Down they go, down they bump!


So they sang as first one barrel and then
another rumbled to the dark opening and was
pushed over into the cold water some feet
below. Some were barrels really empty, some
were tubs neatly packed with a dwarf each; but
down they all went, one after another, with many
a clash and a bump, thudding on top of ones
below, smacking into the water, jostling against
the walls of the tunnel, knocking into one
another, and bobbing away down the current.

It was just at this moment that Bilbo
suddenly discovered the weak point in his plan.
Most likely you saw it some time ago and have
been laughing at him; but I don’t suppose you
would have done half as well yourselves in his
place. Of course he was not in a barrel himself,
nor was there anyone to pack him in, even if
there had been a chance! It looked as if he
would certainly lose his friends this time (nearly
all of them had already disappeared through the
dark trap-door), and get utterly left behind and



have to stay lurking as a permanent burglar in
the elf-caves for ever. For even if he could have
escaped through the upper gates at once, he
had precious small chance of ever finding the
dwarves again. He did not know the way by
land to the place where the barrels were
collected. He wondered what on earth would
happen to them without him; for he had not had
time to tell the dwarves all that he had learned,
or what he had meant to do, once they were out
of the wood.

While all these thoughts were passing
through his mind, the elves being very merry
began to sing a song round the river-door.
Some had already gone to haul on the ropes
which pulled up the portcullis at the water-gate
so as to let out the barrels as soon as they were
all afloat below.


Down the swift dark stream you go
Back to lands you once did know/.
Leave the halls and caverns deep,
Leave the northern mountains steep,
Where the forest wide and dim
Stoops in shadow grey and grim!
Float beyond the world of trees
Out into the whispering breeze,

Past the rushes, past the reeds,

Past the marsh’s waving weeds,
Through the mist that riseth white



Up from mere and pool at night!
Follovy follow stars that leap
Up the heavens cold and steep;
Turn when dawn comes overland,
Over rapid, over sand,

South away! and South away!
Seek the sunlight and the day,
Back to pasture, back to mead,
Where the kine and oxen feed!
Back to gardens on the hills
Where the berry swells and fills
Under sunlight, under day!

South away! and South away!
Down the swift dark stream you go
Back to lands you once did know/.


Now the very last barrel was being rolled to
the doors! In despair and not knowing what else
to do, poor little Bilbo caught hold of it and was
pushed over the edge with it. Down into the
water he fell, splash! into the cold dark water
with the barrel on top of him.

He came up again spluttering and clinging
to the wood like a rat, but for all his efforts he
could not scramble on top. Every time he tried,
the barrel rolled round and ducked him under
again. It was really empty, and floated light as a
cork. Though his ears were full of water, he
could hear the elves still singing in the cellar
above. Then suddenly the trap-doors fell to with



a boom and their voices faded away. He was in
the dark tunnel floating in icy water, all alone —
for you cannot count friends that are all packed
up in barrels.

Very soon a grey patch came in the
darkness ahead. He heard the creak of the
water-gate being hauled up, and he found that
he was in the midst of a bobbing and bumping
mass of casks and tubs all pressing together to
pass under the arch and get out into the open
stream. He had as much as he could do to
prevent himself from being hustled and battered
to bits; but at last the jostling crowd began to
break up and swing off, one by one, under the
stony arch and away Then he saw that it would
have been no good even if he had managed to
get astride his barrel, for there was no room to
spare, not even for a hobbit, between its top
and the suddenly stooping roof where the gate
was.


Out they went under the overhanging branches
of the trees on either bank. Bilbo wondered
what the dwarves were feeling and whether a lot
of water was getting into their tubs. Some of
those that bobbed along by him in the gloom
seemed pretty low in the water, and he guessed
that these had dwarves inside.

“I do hope I put the lids on tight enough!” he



thought, but before long he was worrying too
much about himself to remember the dwarves.
He managed to keep his head above the water,
but he was shivering with the cold, and he
wondered if he would die of it before the luck
turned, and how much longer he would be able
to hang on, and whether he should risk the
chance of letting go and trying to swim to the
bank.

The luck turned all right before long: the
eddying current carried several barrels close
ashore at one point and there for a while they
stuck against some hidden root. Then Bilbo
took the opportunity of scrambling up the side
of his barrel while it was held steady against
another. Up he crawled like a drowned rat, and
lay on the top spread out to keep the balance
as best he could. The breeze was cold but
better than the water, and he hoped he would
not suddenly roll off again when they started off
once more.

Before long the barrels broke free again
and turned and twisted off down the stream,
and out into the main current. Then he found it
quite as difficult to stick on as he had feared;
but he managed it somehow, though it was
miserably uncomfortable. Luckily he was very
light, and the barrel was a good big one and
being rather leaky had now shipped a small
amount of water. All the same it was like trying
to ride, without bridle or stirrups, a round-bellied



pony that was always thinking of rolling on the
grass.

In this way at last Mr. Baggins came to a
place where the trees on either hand grew
thinner. He could see the paler sky between
them. The dark river opened suddenly wide,
and there it was joined to the main water of the
Forest River flowing down in haste from the
king's great doors. There was a dim sheet of
water no longer overshadowed, and on its
sliding surface there were dancing and broken
reflections of clouds and of stars. Then the
hurrying water of the Forest River swept all the
company of casks and tubs away to the north
bank, in which it had eaten out a wide bay. This
had a shingly shore under hanging banks and
was walled at the eastern end by a little jutting
cape of hard rock. On the shallow shore most of
the barrels ran aground, though a few went on
to bump against the stony pier.

There were people on the look-out on the
banks. They quickly poled and pushed all the
barrels together into the shallows, and when
they had counted them they roped them
together and left them till the morning. Poor
dwarves! Bilbo was not badly off now. He
slipped from his barrel and waded ashore, and
then sneaked along to some huts that he could
see near the water’s edge. He no longer
thought twice about picking up a supper
uninvited if he got the chance, he had been



obliged to do it for so long, and he knew now
only too well what it was to be really hungry, not
merely politely interested in the dainties of a
well-filled larder. Also he had caught a glimpse
of a fire through the trees, and that appealed to
him with his dripping and ragged clothes
clinging to him cold and clammy.


There is no need to tell you much of his
adventures that night, for now we are drawing
near the end of the eastward journey and
coming to the last and greatest adventure, so
we must hurry on. Of course helped by his
magic ring he got on very well at first, but he
was given away in the end by his wet footsteps
and the trail of drippings that he left wherever he
went or sat; and also he began to snivel, and
wherever he tried to hide he was found out by
the terrific explosions of his suppressed
sneezes. Very soon there was a fine
commotion in the village by the riverside; but
Bilbo escaped into the woods carrying a loaf
and a leather bottle of wine and a pie that did
not belong to him. The rest of the night he had
to pass wet as he was and far from a fire, but
the bottle helped him to do that, and he actually
dozed a little on some dry leaves, even though
the yearwas getting late and the airwas chilly.

He woke again with a specially loud



sneeze. It was already grey morning, and there
was a merry racket down by the river. They
were making up a raft of barrels, and the raft-
elves would soon be steering it off down the
stream to Lake-town. Bilbo sneezed again. He
was no longer dripping but he felt cold all over.
He scrambled down as fast as his stiff legs
would take him and managed just in time to get
on to the mass of casks without being noticed
in the general bustle. Luckily there was no sun
at the time to cast an awkward shadow, and for
a mercy he did not sneeze again for a good
while.

There was a mighty pushing of poles. The
elves that were standing in the shallow water
heaved and shoved. The barrels now all lashed
together creaked and fretted.

“This is a heavy load!” some grumbled.
“They float too deep — some of these are never
empty. If they had come ashore in the daylight,
we might have had a look inside,” they said.

“No time now!” cried the raftman. “Shove
off!” And off they went at last, slowly at first, until
they had passed the point of rock where other
elves stood to fend them off with poles, and
then quicker and quicker as they caught the
main stream and went sailing away down, down
towards the Lake.

They had escaped the dungeons of the king
and were through the wood, but whether alive or
dead still remains to be seen.





Chapter X


A WARM WELCOME


The day grew lighter and warmer as they
floated along. After a while the river rounded a
steep shoulder of land that came down upon
their left. Under its rocky feet like an inland cliff
the deepest stream had flowed lapping and
bubbling. Suddenly the cliff fell away. The
shores sank. The trees ended. Then Bilbo saw
a sight:

The lands opened wide about him, filled
with the waters of the river which broke up and
wandered in a hundred winding courses, or
halted in marshes and pools dotted with isles
on every side; but still a strong water flowed on
steadily through the midst. And far away, its
dark head in a torn cloud, there loomed the
Mountain! Its nearest neighbours to the North-
East and the tumbled land that joined it to them
could not be seen. All alone it rose and looked
across the marshes to the forest. The Lonely


Mountain! Bilbo had come far and through
many adventures to see it, and now he did not
like the look of it in the least.

As he listened to the talk of the raftmen and
pieced together the scraps of information they
let fall, he soon realized that he was very
fortunate ever to have seen it at all, even from
this distance. Dreary as had been his
imprisonment and unpleasant as was his
position (to say nothing of the poor dwarves
underneath him) still, he had been more lucky
than he had guessed. The talk was all of the
trade that came and went on the waterways and
the growth of the traffic on the river, as the
roads out of the East towards Mirkwood
vanished or fell into disuse; and of the
bickerings of the Lake-men and the Wood-
elves about the upkeep of the Forest River and
the care of the banks. Those lands had
changed much since the days when dwarves
dwelt in the Mountain, days which most people
now remembered only as a very shadowy
tradition. They had changed even in recent
years, and since the last news that Gandalf had
had of them. Great floods and rains had swollen
the waters that flowed east; and there had been
an earthquake or two (which some were
inclined to attribute to the dragon — alluding to
him chiefly with a curse and an ominous nod in



the direction of the Mountain). The marshes and
bogs had spread wider and wider on either
side. Paths had vanished, and many a rider and
wanderer too, if they had tried to find the lost
ways across. The elf-road through the wood
which the dwarves had followed on the advice
of Beorn now came to a doubtful and little used
end at the eastern edge of the forest; only the
river offered any longer a safe way from the
skirts of Mirkwood in the North to the mountain-
shadowed plains beyond, and the river was
guarded by the Wood-elves’ king.

So you see Bilbo had come in the end by
the only road that was any good. It might have
been some comfort to Mr. Baggins shivering on
the barrels, if he had known that news of this
had reached Gandalf far away and given him
great anxiety, and that he was in fact finishing
his other business (which does not come into
this tale) and getting ready to come in search of
Thorin’s company. But Bilbo did not know it.

All he knew was that the river seemed to go
on and on and on for ever, and he was hungry,
and had a nasty cold in the nose, and did not
like the way the Mountain seemed to frown at
him and threaten him as it drew ever nearer.
After a while, however, the river took a more
southerly course and the Mountain receded
again, and at last, late in the day the shores



grew rocky, the river gathered all its wandering
waters together into a deep and rapid flood,
and they swept along at great speed.

The sun had set when turning with another
sweep towards the East the forest-river rushed
into the Long Lake. There it had a wide mouth
with stony clifflike gates at either side whose
feet were piled with shingles. The Long Lake!
Bilbo had never imagined that any water that
was not the sea could look so big. It was so
wide that the opposite shores looked small and
far, but it was so long that its northerly end,
which pointed towards the Mountain, could not
be seen at all. Only from the map did Bilbo
know that away up there, where the stars of the
Wain were already twinkling, the Running River
came down into the lake from Dale and with the
Forest River filled with deep waters what must
once have been a great deep rocky valley. At
the southern end the doubled waters poured out
again over high waterfalls and ran away
hurriedly to unknown lands. In the still evening
air the noise of the falls could be heard like a
distant roar.

Not far from the mouth of the Forest River
was the strange town he heard the elves speak
of in the king’s cellars. It was not built on the
shore, though there were a few huts and
buildings there, but right out on the surface of



the lake, protected from the swirl of the entering
river by a promontory of rock which formed a
calm bay. A great bridge made of wood ran out
to where on huge piles made of forest trees
was built a busy wooden town, not a town of
elves but of Men, who still dared to dwell here
under the shadow of the distant dragon-
mountain. They still throve on the trade that
came up the great river from the South and was
carted past the falls to their town; but in the
great days of old, when Dale in the North was
rich and prosperous, they had been wealthy and
powerful, and there had been fleets of boats on
the waters, and some were filled with gold and
some with warriors in armour, and there had
been wars and deeds which were now only a
legend. The rotting piles of a greater town could
still be seen along the shores when the waters
sank in a drought.

But men remembered little of all that, though
some still sang old songs of the dwarf-kings of
the Mountain, Thror and Thrain of the race of
Durin, and of the coming of the Dragon, and the
fall of the lords of Dale. Some sang too that
Thror and Thrain would come back one day and
gold would flow in rivers, through the mountain-
gates, and all that land would be filled with new
song and new laughter. But this pleasant legend
did not much affect their daily business.





As soon as the raft of barrels came in sight
boats rowed out from the piles of the town, and
voices hailed the raft-steerers. Then ropes were
cast and oars were pulled, and soon the raft
was drawn out of the current of the Forest River
and towed away round the high shoulder of rock
into the little bay of Lake-town. There it was
moored not far from the shoreward head of the
great bridge. Soon men would come up from
the South and take some of the casks away,
and others they would fill with goods they had
brought to be taken back up the stream to the
Wood-elves’ home. In the meanwhile the
barrels were left afloat while the elves of the raft
and the boatmen went to feast in Lake-town.

They would have been surprised, if they
could have seen what happened down by the
shore, after they had gone and the shades of
night had fallen. First of all a barrel was cut
loose by Bilbo and pushed to the shore and
opened. Groans came from inside, and out
crept a most unhappy dwarf. Wet straw was in
his draggled beard; he was so sore and stiff, so
bruised and buffeted he could hardly stand or


stumble through the shallow water to lie
groaning on the shore. He had a famished and
a savage look like a dog that has been chained
and forgotten in a kennel for a week. It was
Thorin, but you could only have told it by his
golden chain, and by the colour of his now dirty
and tattered sky-blue hood with its tarnished
silver tassel. It was some time before he would
be even polite to the hobbit.

“Well, are you alive or are you dead?”
asked Bilbo quite crossly. Perhaps he had
forgotten that he had had at least one good
meal more than the dwarves, and also the use
of his arms and legs, not to speak of a greater
allowance of air. “Are you still in prison, or are
you free? If you want food, and if you want to go
on with this silly adventure — it’s yours after all
and not mine — you had better slap your arms
and rub your legs and try and help me get the
others out while there is a chance!”

Thorin of course saw the sense of this, so
after a few more groans he got up and helped
the hobbit as well as he could. In the darkness
floundering in the cold water they had a difficult
and very nasty job finding which were the right
barrels. Knocking outside and calling only
discovered about six dwarves that could
answer. These were unpacked and helped
ashore where they sat or lay muttering and



moaning; they were so soaked and bruised and
cramped that they could hardly yet realize their
release or be properly thankful for it.

Dwalin and Balin were two of the most
unhappy, and it was no good asking them to
help. Bifur and Bofur were less knocked about
and drier, but they lay down and would do
nothing. Fili and Kili, however, who were young
(for dwarves) and had also been packed more
neatly with plenty of straw into smaller casks,
came out more or less smiling, with only a
bruise or two and a stiffness that soon wore off.

“I hope I never smell the smell of apples
again!” said Fili. “My tub was full of it. To smell
apples everlastingly when you can scarcely
move and are cold and sick with hunger is
maddening. I could eat anything in the wide
world now, for hours on end — but not an apple!”

With the willing help of Fili and Kili, Thorin
and Bilbo at last discovered the remainder of
the company and got them out. Poor fat
Bombur was asleep or senseless; Dori, Nori,
Ori, Oin and Gloin were waterlogged and
seemed only half alive; they all had to be
carried one by one and laid helpless on the
shore.

“Well! Here we are!” said Thorin. “And I
suppose we ought to thank our stars and Mr.
Baggins. I am sure he has a right to expect it,



though I wish he could have arranged a more
comfortable journey. Still — all very much at your
service once more, Mr. Baggins. No doubt we
shall feel properly grateful, when we are fed and
recovered. In the meanwhile what next?”

“I suggest Lake-town,” said Bilbo. “What
else is there?”

Nothing else could, of course, be
suggested; so leaving the others Thorin and Fili
and Kili and the hobbit went along the shore to
the great bridge. There were guards at the
head of it, but they were not keeping very
careful watch, for it was so long since there had
been any real need. Except for occasional
squabbles about river-tolls they were friends
with the Wood-elves. Other folk were far away;
and some of the younger people in the town
openly doubted the existence of any dragon in
the mountain, and laughed at the greybeards
and gammers who said that they had seen him
flying in the sky in their young days. That being
so it is not surprising that the guards were
drinking and laughing by a fire in their hut, and
did not hear the noise of the unpacking of the
dwarves or the footsteps of the four scouts.
Their astonishment was enormous when Thorin
Oakenshield stepped in through the door.

“Who are you and what do you want?” they
shouted leaping to their feet and groping for



weapons.

“Thorin son of Thrain son of Thror King
under the Mountain!” said the dwarf in a loud
voice, and he looked it, in spite of his torn
clothes and draggled hood. The gold gleamed
on his neck and waist; his eyes were dark and
deep. “I have come back. I wish to see the
Master of your town! ”

Then there was tremendous excitement.
Some of the more foolish ran out of the hut as if
they expected the Mountain to go golden in the
night and all the waters of the lake turn yellow
right away. The captain of the guard came
forward.

“And who are these?” he asked, pointing to
Fili and Kili and Bilbo.

“The sons of my father’s daughter,”
answered Thorin, “Fili and Kili of the race of
Durin, and Mr. Baggins who has travelled with
us out of the West.”

“If you come in peace lay down your arms!”
said the captain.

“We have none,” said Thorin, and it was
true enough: their knives had been taken from
them by the wood-elves, and the great sword
Orcrist too. Bilbo had his short sword, hidden
as usual, but he said nothing about that. “We
have no need of weapons, who return at last to
our own as spoken of old. Nor could we fight



against so many. Take us to your master!”

“He is at feast,” said the captain.

“Then all the more reason for taking us to
him,” burst in Fili, who was getting impatient at
these solemnities. “We are worn and famished
after our long road and we have sick comrades.
Now make haste and let us have no more
words, or your master may have something to
say to you.”

“Follow me then,” said the captain, and with
six men about them he led them over the bridge
through the gates and into the market-place of
the town. This was a wide circle of quiet water
surrounded by the tall piles on which were built
the greater houses, and by long wooden quays
with many steps and ladders going down to the
surface of the lake. From one great hall shone
many lights and there came the sound of many
voices. They passed its doors and stood
blinking in the light looking at long tables filled
with folk.

“I am Thorin son of Thrain son of Thror King
under the Mountain! I return!” cried Thorin in a
loud voice from the door, before the captain
could say anything.

All leaped to their feet. The Master of the
town sprang from his great chair. But none rose
in greater surprise than the raft-men of the elves
who were sitting at the lower end of the hall.



Pressing forward before the Master’s table they
cried:

“These are prisoners of our king that have
escaped, wandering vagabond dwarves that
could not give any good account of themselves,
sneaking through the woods and molesting our
people!”

“Is this true?” asked the Master. As a matter
of fact he thought it far more likely than the
return of the King under the Mountain, if any
such person had ever existed.

“It is true that we were wrongfully waylaid by
the Elvenking and imprisoned without cause as
we journeyed back to our own land,” answered
Thorin. “But lock nor bar may hinder the
homecoming spoken of old. Nor is this town in
the Wood-elves’ realm. I speak to the Master of
the town of the Men of the Lake, not to the raft-
men of the king.”

Then the Master hesitated and looked from
one to the other. The Elvenking was very
powerful in those parts and the Master wished
for no enmity with him, nor did he think much of
old songs, giving his mind to trade and tolls, to
cargoes and gold, to which habit he owed his
position. Others were of different mind,
however, and quickly the matter was settled
without him. The news had spread from the
doors of the hall like fire through all the town.



People were shouting inside the hall and
outside it. The quays were thronged with
hurrying feet. Some began to sing snatches of
old songs concerning the return of the King
under the Mountain; that it was Thror’s
grandson not Thror himself that had come back
did not bother them at all. Others took up the
song and it rolled loud and high over the lake.


The King beneath the mountains,
The King of caive n stone,

The lord of silver fountains
Shall come into his ov\n!


His crown shall be upholden,
His harp shall be restrung,
His halls shall echo golden
To songs of yore re-sung.


The mods shall wave on mountains
And grass beneath the sun;

His wealth shall flowin fountains
And the rivers golden run.



The streams shall run in gladness,
The lakes shall shine and burn,
All sorrowfail and sadness
At the Mountain-king’s return!


So they sang, or very like that, only there
was a great deal more of it, and there was
much shouting as well as the music of harps
and of fiddles mixed up with it. Indeed such
excitement had not been known in the town in
the memory of the oldest grandfather. The
Wood-elves themselves began to wonder
greatly and even to be afraid. They did not know
of course how Thorin had escaped, and they
began to think their king might have made a
serious mistake. As for the Master he saw there
was nothing else for it but to obey the general
clamour, for the moment at any rate, and to
pretend to believe that Thorin was what he said.
So he gave up to him his own great chair and
set Fili and Kili beside him in places of honour.
Even Bilbo was given a seat at the high table,
and no explanation of where he came in — no
songs had alluded to him even in the obscurest
way — was asked for in the general bustle.

Soon afterwards the other dwarves were
brought into the town amid scenes of



astonishing enthusiasm. They were all doctored
and fed and housed and pampered in the most
delightful and satisfactory fashion. A large
house was given up to Thorin and his company;
boats and rowers were put at their service; and
crowds sat outside and sang songs all day, or
cheered if any dwarf showed so much as his
nose.

Some of the songs were old ones; but
some of them were quite new and spoke
confidently of the sudden death of the dragon
and of cargoes of rich presents coming down
the river to Lake-town. These were inspired
largely by the Master and they did not
particularly please the dwarves, but in the
meantime they were well contented and they
quickly grew fat and strong again. Indeed within
a week they were quite recovered, fitted out in
fine cloth of their proper colours, with beards
combed and trimmed, and proud steps. Thorin
looked and walked as if his kingdom was
already regained and Smaug chopped up into
little pieces.

Then, as he had said, the dwarves’ good
feeling towards the little hobbit grew stronger
every day. There were no more groans or
grumbles. They drank his health, and they
patted him on the back, and they made a great
fuss of him; which was just as well, for he was



not feeling particularly cheerful. He had not
forgotten the look of the Mountain, nor the
thought of the dragon, and he had besides a
shocking cold. For three days he sneezed and
coughed, and he could not go out, and even
after that his speeches at banquets were
limited to “Thag you very buch.”


In the meanwhile the Wood-elves had gone
back up the Forest River with their cargoes,
and there was great excitement in the king’s
palace. I have never heard what happened to
the chief of the guards and the butler. Nothing of
course was ever said about keys or barrels
while the dwarves stayed in Lake-town, and
Bilbo was careful never to become invisible.
Still, I daresay, more was guessed than was
known, though doubtless Mr. Baggins remained
a bit of a mystery. In any case the king knew
now the dwarves’ errand, or thought he did, and
he said to himself:

“Very well! We’ll see! No treasure will come
back through Mirkwood without my having
something to say in the matter. But I expect they
will all come to a bad end, and serve them
right!” He at any rate did not believe in dwarves
fighting and killing dragons like Smaug, and he



strongly suspected attempted burglary or
something like it — which shows he was a wise
elf and wiser than the men of the town, though
not quite right, as we shall see in the end. He
sent out his spies about the shores of the lake
and as far northward towards the Mountain as
they would go, and waited.

At the end of a fortnight Thorin began to
think of departure. While the enthusiasm still
lasted in the town was the time to get help. It
would not do to let everything cool down with
delay. So he spoke to the Master and his

councillors and said that soon he and his

company must go on towards the Mountain.

Then for the first time the Master was
surprised and a little frightened; and he

wondered if Thorin was after all really a

descendant of the old kings. He had never
thought that the dwarves would actually dare to
approach Smaug, but believed they were
frauds who would sooner or later be discovered
and be turned out. He was wrong. Thorin, of
course, was really the grandson of the King
under the Mountain, and there is no knowing
what a dwarf will not dare and do for revenge or
the recovery of his own.

But the Master was not sorry at all to let
them go. They were expensive to keep, and
their arrival had turned things into a long holiday



in which business was at a standstill. “Let them
go and bother Smaug, and see how he
welcomes them!” he thought. “Certainly, O
Thorin Thrain’s son Thror’s son!” was what he
said. “You must claim your own. The hour is at
hand, spoken of old. What help we can offer
shall be yours, and we trust to your gratitude
when your kingdom is regained.”

So one day, although autumn was now
getting far on, and winds were cold, and leaves
were falling fast, three large boats left Lake-
town, laden with rowers, dwarves, Mr. Baggins,
and many provisions. Horses and ponies had
been sent round by circuitous paths to meet
them at their appointed landing-place. The
Master and his councillors bade them farewell
from the great steps of the town-hall that went
down to the lake. People sang on the quays
and out of windows. The white oars dipped and
splashed, and off they went north up the lake on
the last stage of their long journey. The only
person thoroughly unhappy was Bilbo.




Chapter XI


ON THE DOORSTEP


In two days going they rowed right up the Long
Lake and passed out into the River Running,
and now they could all see the Lonely Mountain
towering grim and tall before them. The stream
was strong and their going slow. At the end of
the third day, some miles up the river, they drew
in to the left or western bank and disembarked.
Here they were joined by the horses with other
provisions and necessaries and the ponies for
their own use that had been sent to meet them.
They packed what they could on the ponies and
the rest was made into a store under a tent, but
none of the men of the town would stay with
them even for the night so near the shadow of
the Mountain.

“Not at any rate until the songs have come
true!” said they. It was easier to believe in the
Dragon and less easy to believe in Thorin in
these wild parts. Indeed their stores had no
need of any guard, for all the land was desolate
and empty. So their escort left them, making off
swiftly down the river and the shoreward paths,
although the night was already drawing on.

They spent a cold and lonely night and their
spirits fell. The next day they set out again. Balin
and Bilbo rode behind, each leading another
pony heavily laden beside him; the others were
some way ahead picking out a slow road, for


there were no paths. They made north-west,
slanting away from the River Running, and
drawing ever nearer and nearer to a great spur
of the Mountain that was flung out southwards
towards them.

It was a weary journey, and a quiet and
stealthy one. There was no laughter or song or
sound of harps, and the pride and hopes which
had stirred in their hearts at the singing of old
songs by the lake died away to a plodding
gloom. They knew that they were drawing near
to the end of their journey, and that it might be a
very horrible end. The land about them grew
bleak and barren, though once, as Thorin told
them, it had been green and fair. There was
little grass, and before long there was neither
bush nor tree, and only broken and blackened
stumps to speak of ones long vanished. They
were come to the Desolation of the Dragon,
and they were come at the waning of the year.


They reached the skirts of the Mountain all the
same without meeting any danger or any sign of
the Dragon other than the wilderness he had
made about his lair. The Mountain lay dark and
silent before them and ever higher above them.
They made their first camp on the western side
of the great southern spur, which ended in a
height called Ravenhill. On this there had been
an old watch-post; but they dared not climb it
yet, it was too exposed.

Before setting out to search the western
spurs of the Mountain for the hidden door, on
which all their hopes rested, Thorin sent out a
scouting expedition to spy out the land to the
South where the Front Gate stood. For this



purpose he chose Balin and Fili and Kili, and
with them went Bilbo. They marched under the
grey and silent cliffs to the feet of Ravenhill.
There the river, after winding a wide loop over
the valley of Dale, turned from the Mountain on
its road to the Lake, flowing swift and noisily. Its
bank was bare and rocky, tall and steep above
the stream; and gazing out from it over the
narrow water, foaming and splashing among
many boulders, they could see in the wide valley
shadowed by the Mountain’s arms the grey
ruins of ancient houses, towers, and walls.

“There lies all that is left of Dale,” said Balin.
“The mountain’s sides were green with woods
and all the sheltered valley rich and pleasant in
the days when the bells rang in that town.” He
looked both sad and grim as he said this: he
had been one of Thorin’s companions on the
day the Dragon came.

They did not dare to follow the river much
further towards the Gate; but they went on
beyond the end of the southern spur, until lying
hidden behind a rock they could look out and
see the dark cavernous opening in a great cliff-
wall between the arms of the Mountain. Out of it
the waters of the Running River sprang; and out
of it too there came a steam and a dark smoke.
Nothing moved in the waste, save the vapour
and the water, and every now and again a black
and ominous crow. The only sound was the
sound of the stony water, and every now and
again the harsh croak of a bird. Balin
shuddered.

“Let us return!” he said. “We can do no
good here! And I don’t like these dark birds,
they look like spies of evil.”




The Front Gate.


“The dragon is still alive and in the halls
under the Mountain then — or I imagine so from
the smoke," said the hobbit.



“That does not prove it,” said Balin, “though
I don’t doubt you are right. But he might be gone
away some time, or he might be lying out on the
mountain-side keeping watch, and still I expect
smokes and steams would come out of the
gates: all the halls within must be filled with his
foul reek.”


With such gloomy thoughts, followed ever by
croaking crows above them, they made their
weary way back to the camp. Only in June they
had been guests in the fair house of Elrond, and
though autumn was now crawling towards
winter that pleasant time now seemed years
ago. They were alone in the perilous waste
without hope of further help. They were at the
end of their journey, but as far as ever, it
seemed, from the end of their quest. None of
them had much spirit left.

Now strange to say Mr. Baggins had more
than the others. He would often borrow Thorin's
map and gaze at it, pondering over the runes
and the message of the moon-letters Elrond
had read. It was he that made the dwarves
begin the dangerous search on the western
slopes for the secret door. They moved their
camp then to a long valley, narrower than the
great dale in the South where the Gates of the
river stood, and walled with lower spurs of the
Mountain. Two of these here thrust forward west
from the main mass in long steep-sided ridges
that fell ever downwards towards the plain. On
this western side there were fewer signs of the
dragon’s marauding feet, and there was some
grass for their ponies. From this western camp,
shadowed all day by cliff and wall until the sun



began to sink towards the forest, day by day
they toiled in parties searching for paths up the
mountain-side, if the map was true, somewhere
high above the cliff at the valley’s head must
stand the secret door. Day by day they came
back to their camp without success.

But at last unexpectedly they found what
they were seeking. Fili and Kili and the hobbit
went back one day down the valley and
scrambled among the tumbled rocks at its
southern corner. About midday, creeping
behind a great stone that stood alone like a
pillar, Bilbo came on what looked like rough
steps going upwards. Following these excitedly
he and the dwarves found traces of a narrow
track, often lost, often rediscovered, that
wandered on to the top of the southern ridge
and brought them at last to a still narrower
ledge, which turned north across the face of the
Mountain. Looking down they saw that they
were at the top of the cliff at the valley’s head
and were gazing down on to their own camp
below. Silently, clinging to the rocky wall on their
right, they went in single file along the ledge, till
the wall opened and they turned into a little
steep-walled bay, grassy-floored, still and quiet.
Its entrance which they had found could not be
seen from below because of the overhang of
the cliff, nor from further off because it was so
small that it looked like a dark crack and no
more. It was not a cave and was open to the sky
above; but at its inner end a flat wall rose up
that in the lower part, close to the ground, was
as smooth and upright as masons' work, but
without a joint or crevice to be seen. No sign
was there of post or lintel or threshold, nor any
sign of bar or bolt or key-hole; yet they did not
doubt that they had found the door at last.



They beat on it, they thrust and pushed at it,
they implored it to move, they spoke fragments
of broken spells of opening, and nothing stirred.
At last tired out they rested on the grass at its
feet, and then at evening began their long climb
down.


There was excitement in the camp that night. In
the morning they prepared to move once more.
Only Bofur and Bombur were left behind to
guard the ponies and such stores as they had
brought with them from the river. The others
went down the valley and up the newly found
path, and so to the narrow ledge. Along this
they could carry no bundles or packs, so narrow
and breathless was it, with a fall of a hundred
and fifty feet beside them on to sharp rocks
below; but each of them took a good coil of
rope wound tight about his waist, and so at last
without mishap they reached the little grassy
bay.

There they made their third camp, hauling
up what they needed from below with their
ropes. Down the same way they were able
occasionally to lower one of the more active
dwarves, such as Kili, to exchange such news
as there was, or to take a share in the guard
below, while Bofur was hauled up to the higher
camp. Bombur would not come up either the
rope or the path.

"I am too fat for such fly-walks,” he said. “I
should turn dizzy and tread on my beard, and
then you would be thirteen again. And the
knotted ropes are too slender for my weight.”
Luckily for him that was not true, as you will see.



In the meanwhile some of them explored the
ledge beyond the opening and found a path that
led higher and higher on to the mountain; but
they did not dare to venture very far that way,
nor was there much use in it. Out up there a
silence reigned, broken by no bird or sound
except that of the wind in the crannies of stone.
They spoke low and never called or sang, for
danger brooded in every rock. The others who
were busy with the secret of the door had no
more success. They were too eager to trouble
about the runes or the moon-letters, but tried
without resting to discover where exactly in the
smooth face of the rock the door was hidden.
They had brought picks and tools of many sorts
from Lake-town, and at first they tried to use
these. But when they struck the stone the
handles splintered and jarred their arms cruelly,
and the steel heads broke or bent like lead.
Mining work, they saw clearly, was no good
against the magic that had shut this door; and
they grew terrified, too, of the echoing noise.

Bilbo found sitting on the doorstep
lonesome and wearisome — there was not a
doorstep, of course, really, but they used to call
the little grassy space between the wall and the
opening the “doorstep” in fun, remembering
Bilbo's words long ago at the unexpected party
in his hobbit-hole, when he said they could sit
on the doorstep till they thought of something.
And sit and think they did, or wandered
aimlessly about, and glummer and glummer
they became.

Their spirits had risen a little at the
discovery of the path, but now they sank into
their boots; and yet they would not give it up and
go away. The hobbit was no longer much



brighter than the dwarves. He would do nothing
but sit with his back to the rock-face and stare
away west through the opening, over the cliff,
over the wide lands to the black wall of
Mirkwood, and to the distances beyond, in
which he sometimes thought he could catch
glimpses of the Misty Mountains small and far. If
the dwarves asked him what he was doing he
answered:

“You said sitting on the doorstep and
thinking would be my job, not to mention getting
inside, so I am sitting and thinking.” But I am
afraid he was not thinking much of the job, but
of what lay beyond the blue distance, the quiet
Western Land and the Hill and his hobbit-hole
under it.

A large grey stone lay in the centre of the
grass and he stared moodily at it or watched
the great snails. They seemed to love the little
shut-in bay with its walls of cool rock, and there
were many of them of huge size crawling slowly
and stickily along its sides.


“Tomorrow begins the last week of autumn,”
said Thorin one day.

“And winter comes after autumn,” said Bifur.

“And next year after that,” said Dwalin, “and
our beards will grow till they hang down the cliff
to the valley before anything happens here.
What is our burglar doing for us? Since he has
got an invisible ring, and ought to be a specially
excellent performer now, I am beginning to think
he might go through the Front Gate and spy
things out a bit!"

Bilbo heard this — the dwarves were on the
rocks just above the enclosure where he was



sitting — and “Good Gracious!” he thought, “so
that is what they are beginning to think, is it? It
is always poor me that has to get them out of
their difficulties, at least since the wizard left.
Whatever am I going to do? I might have known
that something dreadful would happen to me in
the end. I don’t think I could bear to see the
unhappy valley of Dale again, and as for that
steaming gate! I I”

That night he was very miserable and hardly
slept. Next day the dwarves all went wandering
off in various directions; some were exercising
the ponies down below, some were roving
about the mountain-side. All day Bilbo sat
gloomily in the grassy bay gazing at the stone,
or out west through the narrow opening. He had
a queer feeling that he was waiting for
something. “Perhaps the wizard will suddenly
come back today,” he thought.

If he lifted his head he could see a glimpse
of the distant forest. As the sun turned west
there was a gleam of yellow upon its far roof, as
if the light caught the last pale leaves. Soon he
saw the orange ball of the sun sinking towards
the level of his eyes. He went to the opening
and there pale and faint was a thin new moon
above the rim of Earth.

At that very moment he heard a sharp crack
behind him. There on the grey stone in the
grass was an enormous thrush, nearly coal
black, its pale yellow breast freckled with dark
spots. Crack! It had caught a snail and was
knocking it on the stone. Crack! Crack!

Suddenly Bilbo understood. Forgetting all
danger he stood on the ledge and hailed the
dwarves, shouting and waving. Those that were
nearest came tumbling over the rocks and as
fast as they could along the ledge to him,



wondering what on earth was the matter; the
others shouted to be hauled up the ropes
(except Bombur, of course: he was asleep).

Quickly Bilbo explained. They all fell silent:
the hobbit standing by the grey stone, and the
dwarves with wagging beards watching
impatiently. The sun sank lower and lower, and
their hopes fell. It sank into a belt of reddened
cloud and disappeared. The dwarves groaned,
but still Bilbo stood almost without moving. The
little moon was dipping to the horizon. Evening
was coming on. Then suddenly when their hope
was lowest a red ray of the sun escaped like a
finger through a rent in the cloud. A gleam of
light came straight through the opening into the
bay and fell on the smooth rock-face. The old
thrush, who had been watching from a high
perch with beady eyes and head cocked on
one side, gave a sudden trill. There was a loud
crack. A flake of rock split from the wall and fell.
A hole appeared suddenly about three feet from
the ground.

Quickly, trembling lest the chance should
fade, the dwarves rushed to the rock and
pushed — in vain.

“The key! The key!" cried Bilbo. “Where is
Thorin?"

Thorin hurried up.

“The key!" shouted Bilbo. “The key that went
with the map! Try it now while there is still time!”

Then Thorin stepped up and drew the key
on its chain from round his neck. He put it to the
hole. It fitted and it turned! Snap! The gleam
went out, the sun sank, the moon was gone, and
evening sprang into the sky.

Now they all pushed together, and slowly a
part of the rock-wall gave way. Long straight
cracks appeared and widened. A door five feet



high and three broad was outlined, and slowly
without a sound swung inwards. It seemed as if
darkness flowed out like a vapour from the hole
in the mountain-side, and deep darkness in
which nothing could be seen lay before their
eyes, a yawning mouth leading in and down.




Chapter XII


INSIDE INFORMATION


For a long time the dwarves stood in the dark
before the door and debated, until at last Thorin
spoke:

“Now is the time for our esteemed Mr.
Baggins, who has proved himself a good
companion on our long road, and a hobbit full of
courage and resource far exceeding his size,
and if I may say so possessed of good luck far
exceeding the usual allowance — now is the
time for him to perform the service for which he
was included in our Company; now is the time
for him to earn his Reward.”

You are familiar with Thorin’s style on
important occasions, so I will not give you any
more of it, though he went on a good deal
longer than this. It certainly was an important
occasion, but Bilbo felt impatient. By now he
was quite familiar with Thorin too, and he knew
what he was driving at.


“If you mean you think it is my job to go into
the secret passage first, O Thorin Thrain’s son
Oakenshield, may your beard grow ever
longer," he said crossly, “say so at once and
have done! I might refuse. I have got you out of
two messes already, which were hardly in the
original bargain, so that I am, I think, already
owed some reward. But ‘third time pays for all’
as my father used to say, and somehow I don’t
think I shall refuse. Perhaps I have begun to
trust my luck more than I used to in the old
days” — he meant last spring before he left his
own house, but it seemed centuries ago — “but
anyway I think I will go and have a peep at once
and get it over. Now who is coming with me?”

He did not expect a chorus of volunteers, so
he was not disappointed. Fili and Kili looked
uncomfortable and stood on one leg, but the
others made no pretence of offering — except
old Balin, the lookout man, who was rather fond
of the hobbit. He said he would come inside at
least and perhaps a bit of the way too, ready to
call for help if necessary.

The most that can be said for the dwarves
is this: they intended to pay Bilbo really
handsomely for his services; they had brought
him to do a nasty job for them, and they did not
mind the poor little fellow doing it if he would;
but they would all have done their best to get



him out of trouble, if he got into it, as they did in
the case of the trolls at the beginning of their
adventures before they had any particular
reasons for being grateful to him. There it is:
dwarves are not heroes, but calculating folk with
a great idea of the value of money; some are
tricky and treacherous and pretty bad lots;
some are not, but are decent enough people
like Thorin and Company, if you don’t expect
too much.


The stars were coming out behind him in a pale
sky barred with black when the hobbit crept
through the enchanted door and stole into the
Mountain. It was far easier going than he
expected. This was no goblin entrance, or
rough wood-elves’ cave. It was a passage
made by dwarves, at the height of their wealth
and skill: straight as a ruler, smooth-floored and
smooth-sided, going with a gentle never-varying
slope direct — to some distant end in the
blackness below.

After a while Balin bade Bilbo “Good luck!”
and stopped where he could still see the faint
outline of the door, and by a trick of the echoes
of the tunnel hear the rustle of the whispering
voices of the others just outside. Then the



hobbit slipped on his ring, and warned by the
echoes to take more than hobbit’s care to
make no sound, he crept noiselessly down,
down, down into the dark. He was trembling
with fear, but his little face was set and grim.
Already he was a very different hobbit from the
one that had run out without a pocket-
handkerchief from Bag-End long ago. He had
not had a pocket-handkerchief for ages. He
loosened his dagger in its sheath, tightened his
belt, and went on.


“Now you are in for it at last, Bilbo Baggins,” he
said to himself. “You went and put your foot right
in it that night of the party, and now you have got
to pull it out and pay for it! Dear me, what a fool
I was and am!” said the least Tookish part of
him. “I have absolutely no use for dragon-
guarded treasures, and the whole lot could stay
here for ever, if only I could wake up and find
this beastly tunnel was my own front-hall at
home!”

He did not wake up of course, but went still
on and on, till all sign of the door behind had
faded away. He was altogether alone. Soon he
thought it was beginning to feel warm. “Is that a
kind of a glow I seem to see coming right



ahead down there?” he thought.

It was. As he went forward it grew and grew,
till there was no doubt about it. It was a red light
steadily getting redder and redder. Also it was
now undoubtedly hot in the tunnel. Wisps of
vapour floated up and past him and he began to
sweat. A sound, too, began to throb in his ears,
a sort of bubbling like the noise of a large pot
galloping on the fire, mixed with a rumble as of
a gigantic tom-cat purring. This grew to the
unmistakable gurgling noise of some vast
animal snoring in its sleep down there in the red
glow in front of him.

It was at this point that Bilbo stopped.
Going on from there was the bravest thing he
ever did. The tremendous things that happened
afterwards were as nothing compared to it. He
fought the real battle in the tunnel alone, before
he ever saw the vast danger that lay in wait. At
any rate after a short halt go on he did; and you
can picture him coming to the end of the tunnel,
an opening of much the same size and shape
as the door above. Through it peeps the
hobbit’s little head. Before him lies the great
bottom-most cellar or dungeon-hall of the
ancient dwarves right at the Mountain’s root. It
is almost dark so that its vastness can only be
dimly guessed, but rising from the near side of
the rocky floor there is a great glow. The glow of



Smaug!


There he lay, a vast red-golden dragon, fast
asleep; a thrumming came from his jaws and
nostrils, and wisps of smoke, but his fires were
low in slumber. Beneath him, under all his limbs
and his huge coiled tail, and about him on all
sides stretching away across the unseen floors,
lay countless piles of precious things, gold
wrought and unwrought, gems and jewels, and
silver red-stained in the ruddy light.

Smaug lay, with wings folded like an
immeasurable bat, turned partly on one side, so
that the hobbit could see his underparts and his
long pale belly crusted with gems and
fragments of gold from his long lying on his
costly bed. Behind him where the walls were
nearest could dimly be seen coats of mail,
helms and axes, swords and spears hanging;
and there in rows stood great jars and vessels
filled with a wealth that could not be guessed.

To say that Bilbo’s breath was taken away
is no description at all. There are no words left
to express his staggerment, since Men
changed the language that they learned of elves
in the days when all the world was wonderful.
Bilbo had heard tell and sing of dragon-hoards



before, but the splendour, the lust, the glory of
such treasure had never yet come home to him.
His heart was filled and pierced with
enchantment and with the desire of dwarves;
and he gazed motionless, almost forgetting the
frightful guardian, at the gold beyond price and
count.


He gazed for what seemed an age, before
drawn almost against his will, he stole from the
shadow of the doorway, across the floor to the
nearest edge of the mounds of treasure. Above
him the sleeping dragon lay, a dire menace
even in his sleep. He grasped a great two-
handled cup, as heavy as he could carry, and
cast one fearful eye upwards. Smaug stirred a
wing, opened a claw, the rumble of his snoring
changed its note.

Then Bilbo fled. But the dragon did not
wake — not yet — but shifted into other dreams of
greed and violence, lying there in his stolen hall
while the little hobbit toiled back up the long
tunnel. His heart was beating and a more
fevered shaking was in his legs than when he
was going down, but still he clutched the cup,
and his chief thought was: “I’ve done it! This will
show them. ‘More like a grocer than a burglar’



indeed! Well, we’ll hear no more of that.”

Nor did he. Balin was overjoyed to see the
hobbit again, and as delighted as he was
surprised. He picked Bilbo up and carried him
out into the open air. It was midnight and clouds
had covered the stars, but Bilbo lay with his
eyes shut, gasping and taking pleasure in the
feel of the fresh air again, and hardly noticing
the excitement of the dwarves, or how they
praised him and patted him on the back and put
themselves and all their families for generations
to come at his service.


The dwarves were still passing the cup from
hand to hand and talking delightedly of the
recovery of their treasure, when suddenly a vast
rumbling woke in the mountain underneath as if
it was an old volcano that had made up its mind
to start eruptions once again. The door behind
them was pulled nearly to, and blocked from
closing with a stone, but up the long tunnel
came the dreadful echoes, from far down in the
depths, of a bellowing and a trampling that
made the ground beneath them tremble.

Then the dwarves forgot their joy and their
confident boasts of a moment before and
cowered down in fright. Smaug was still to be



reckoned with. It does not do to leave a live
dragon out of your calculations, if you live near
him. Dragons may not have much real use for
all their wealth, but they know it to an ounce as a
rule, especially after long possession; and
Smaug was no exception. He had passed from
an uneasy dream (in which a warrior, altogether
insignificant in size but provided with a bitter
sword and great courage, figured most
unpleasantly) to a doze, and from a doze to
wide waking. There was a breath of strange air
in his cave. Could there be a draught from that
little hole? He had never felt quite happy about
it, though it was so small, and now he glared at
it in suspicion and wondered why he had never
blocked it up. Of late he had half fancied he had
caught the dim echoes of a knocking sound
from far above that came down through it to his
lair. He stirred and stretched forth his neck to
sniff. Then he missed the cup!

Thieves! Fire! Murder! Such a thing had not
happened since first he came to the Mountain!
His rage passes description — the sort of rage
that is only seen when rich folk that have more
than they can enjoy suddenly lose something
that they have long had but have never before
used or wanted. His fire belched forth, the hall
smoked, he shook the mountain-roots. He thrust
his head in vain at the little hole, and then



coiling his length together, roaring like thunder
underground, he sped from his deep lair
through its great door, out into the huge
passages of the mountain-palace and up
towards the Front Gate.

To hunt the whole mountain till he had
caught the thief and had torn and trampled him
was his one thought. He issued from the Gate,
the waters rose in fierce whistling steam, and
up he soared blazing into the air and settled on
the mountain-top in a spout of green and scarlet
flame. The dwarves heard the awful rumour of
his flight, and they crouched against the walls of
the grassy terrace cringing under boulders,
hoping somehow to escape the frightful eyes of
the hunting dragon.

There they would have all been killed, if it
had not been for Bilbo once again. “Quick!
Quick!” he gasped. “The door! The tunnel! It’s
no good here.”

Roused by these words they were just
about to creep inside the tunnel when Bifur
gave a cry: “My cousins! Bombur and Bofur —
we have forgotten them, they are down in the
valley!”

“They will be slain, and all our ponies too,
and all our stores lost,” moaned the others. “We
can do nothing.”

“Nonsense!” said Thorin, recovering his



dignity. “We cannot leave them. Get inside Mr.
Baggins and Balin, and you two Fili and Kili —
the dragon shan’t have all of us. Now you
others, where are the ropes? Be quick!”

Those were perhaps the worst moments
they had been through yet. The horrible sounds
of Smaug’s anger were echoing in the stony
hollows far above; at any moment he might
come blazing down or fly whirling round and find
them there, near the perilous cliffs edge hauling
madly on the ropes. Up came Bofur, and still all
was safe. Up came Bombur, puffing and
blowing while the ropes creaked, and still all
was safe. Up came some tools and bundles of
stores, and then danger was upon them.

A whirring noise was heard. A red light
touched the points of standing rocks. The
dragon came.

They had barely time to fly back to the
tunnel, pulling and dragging in their bundles,
when Smaug came hurtling from the North,
licking the mountain-sides with flame, beating
his great wings with a noise like a roaring wind.
His hot breath shrivelled the grass before the
door, and drove in through the crack they had
left and scorched them as they lay hid.
Flickering fires leaped up and black rock-
shadows danced. Then darkness fell as he
passed again. The ponies screamed with



terror, burst their ropes and galloped wildly off.
The dragon swooped and turned to pursue
them, and was gone.

“That’ll be the end of our poor beasts!” said
Thorin. “Nothing can escape Smaug once he
sees it. Here we are and here we shall have to
stay, unless any one fancies tramping the long
open miles back to the river with Smaug on the
watch!”

It was not a pleasant thought! They crept
further down the tunnel, and there they lay and
shivered though it was warm and stuffy, until
dawn came pale through the crack of the door.
Every now and again through the night they
could hear the roar of the flying dragon grow
and then pass and fade, as he hunted round
and round the mountain-sides.

He guessed from the ponies, and from the
traces of the camps he had discovered, that
men had come up from the river and the lake
and had scaled the mountain-side from the
valley where the ponies had been standing; but
the door withstood his searching eye, and the
little high-walled bay had kept out his fiercest
flames. Long he had hunted in vain till the dawn
chilled his wrath and he went back to his golden
couch to sleep — and to gather new strength. He
would not forget or forgive the theft, not if a
thousand years turned him to smouldering



stone, but he could afford to wait. Slow and
silent he crept back to his lair and half closed
his eyes.

When morning came the terror of the
dwarves grew less. They realized that dangers
of this kind were inevitable in dealing with such
a guardian, and that it was no good giving up
their quest yet. Nor could they get away just
now, as Thorin had pointed out. Their ponies
were lost or killed, and they would have to wait
some time before Smaug relaxed his watch
sufficiently for them to dare the long way on foot.
Luckily they had saved enough of their stores to
last them still for some time.

They debated long on what was to be done,
but they could think of no way of getting rid of
Smaug — which had always been a weak point
in their plans, as Bilbo felt inclined to point out.
Then as is the nature of folk that are thoroughly
perplexed, they began to grumble at the hobbit,
blaming him for what had at first so pleased
them: for bringing away a cup and stirring up
Smaug’s wrath so soon.

“What else do you suppose a burglar is to
do?” asked Bilbo angrily. “I was not engaged to
kill dragons, that is warrior’s work, but to steal
treasure. I made the best beginning I could. Did
you expect me to trot back with the whole hoard
of Thror on my back? If there is any grumbling to



be done, I think I might have a say. You ought to
have brought five hundred burglars not one. I
am sure it reflects great credit on your
grandfather, but you cannot pretend that you
ever made the vast extent of his wealth clear to
me. I should want hundreds of years to bring it
all up, if I was fifty times as big, and Smaug as
tame as a rabbit.”

After that of course the dwarves begged his
pardon. “What then do you propose we should
do, Mr. Baggins?” asked Thorin politely.

“I have no idea at the moment — if you mean
about removing the treasure. That obviously
depends entirely on some new turn of luck and
the getting rid of Smaug. Getting rid of dragons
is not at all in my line, but I will do my best to
think about it. Personally I have no hopes at all,
and wish I was safe back at home.”

"Never mind that for the moment! What are
we to do now, to-day?”

“Well, if you really want my advice, I should
say we can do nothing but stay where we are.
By day we can no doubt creep out safely
enough to take the air. Perhaps before long one
or two could be chosen to go back to the store
by the river and replenish our supplies. But in
the meanwhile everyone ought to be well inside
the tunnel by night.

“Now I will make you an offer. I have got my



ring and will creep down this very noon — then if
ever Smaug ought to be napping — and see
what he is up to. Perhaps something will turn
up. ‘Every worm has his weak spot,’ as my
father used to say, though I am sure it was not
from personal experience.”

Naturally the dwarves accepted the offer
eagerly. Already they had come to respect little
Bilbo. Now he had become the real leader in
their adventure. He had begun to have ideas
and plans of his own. When midday came he
got ready for another journey down into the
Mountain. He did not like it of course, but it was
not so bad now he knew, more or less, what
was in front of him. Had he known more about
dragons and their wily ways, he might have
been more frightened and less hopeful of
catching this one napping.

The sun was shining when he started, but it
was as dark as night in the tunnel. The light from
the door, almost closed, soon faded as he went
down. So silent was his going that smoke on a
gentle wind could hardly have surpassed it, and
he was inclined to feel a bit proud of himself as
he drew near the lower door. There was only the
veryfaintestglowto be seen.

“Old Smaug is weary and asleep,” he
thought. “He can’t see me and he won’t hear
me. Cheer up Bilbo!” He had forgotten or had



never heard about dragons’ sense of smell. It is
also an awkward fact that they can keep half an
eye open watching while they sleep, if they are
suspicious.

Smaug certainly looked fast asleep, almost
dead and dark, with scarcely a snore more than
a whiff of unseen steam, when Bilbo peeped
once more from the entrance. He was just about
to step out on to the floor when he caught a
sudden thin and piercing ray of red from under
the drooping lid of Smaug’s left eye. He was
only pretending to sleep! He was watching the
tunnel entrance! Hurriedly Bilbo stepped back
and blessed the luck of his ring. Then Smaug
spoke.


“Well, thief! I smell you and I feel your air. I hear
your breath. Come along! Help yourself again,
there is plenty and to spare!”

But Bilbo was not quite so unlearned in
dragon-lore as all that, and if Smaug hoped to
get him to come nearer so easily he was
disappointed. "No thank you, O Smaug the
Tremendous!” he replied. “I did not come for
presents. I only wished to have a look at you
and see if you were truly as great as tales say. I
did not believe them.”



“Do you now?” said the dragon somewhat
flattered, even thouqh he did not believe a word
of it.

“Truly songs and tales fall utterly short of the
reality, O Smaug the Chiefest and Greatest of
Calamities,” replied Bilbo.

“You have nice manners for a thief and a
liar,” said the dragon. “You seem familiar with
my name, but I don’t seem to remember
smelling you before. Who are you and where do
you come from, may I ask?”

“You may indeed! I come from under the hill,
and under the hills and over the hills my paths
led. And through the air. I am he that walks
unseen.”

“So I can well believe,” said Smaug, “but
that is hardly your usual name.”

“I am the clue-finder, the web-cutter, the
stinging fly. I was chosen for the lucky number.”

“Lovely titles!” sneered the dragon. “But
lucky numbers don’t always come off.”

“I am he that buries his friends alive and
drowns them and draws them alive again from
the water. I came from the end of a bag, but no
bag went over me.”

“These don’t sound so creditable,” scoffed
Smaug.

“I am the friend of bears and the guest of
eagles. I am Ringwinner and Luckwearer; and I



am Barrel-rider,” went on Bilbo beginning to be
pleased with his riddling.

“That’s better!” said Smaug. “But don’t let
your imagination run away with you!”