
This of course is the way to talk to dragons, if
you don’t want to reveal your proper name
(which is wise), and don’t want to infuriate them
by a flat refusal (which is also very wise). No
dragon can resist the fascination of riddling talk
and of wasting time trying to understand it.
There was a lot here which Smaug did not
understand at all (though I expect you do, since
you know all about Bilbo’s adventures to which
he was referring), but he thought he understood
enough, and he chuckled in his wicked inside.

“I thought so last night,” he smiled to
himself. “Lake-men, some nasty scheme of
those miserable tub-trading Lake-men, or I’m a
lizard. I haven’t been down that way for an age
and an age; but I will soon alter that!”

“Very well, O Barrel-rider!” he said aloud.
“Maybe Barrel was your pony’s name; and
maybe not, though it was fat enough. You may
walk unseen, but you did not walk all the way.
Let me tell you I ate six ponies last night and I
shall catch and eat all the others before long. In



return for the excellent meal I will give you one
piece of advice for your good: don’t have more
to do with dwarves than you can help!”

“Dwarves!” said Bilbo in pretended
surprise.

“Don’t talk to me!” said Smaug. “I know the
smell (and taste) of dwarf — no one better. Don’t
tell me that I can eat a dwarf-ridden pony and
not know it! You’ll come to a bad end, if you go
with such friends, Thief Barrel-rider. I don’t mind
if you go back and tell them so from me.” But he
did not tell Bilbo that there was one smell he
could not make out at all, hobbit-smell; it was
quite outside his experience and puzzled him
mightily.

“I suppose you got a fair price for that cup
last night?” he went on. “Come now, did you?
Nothing at all! Well, that’s just like them. And I
suppose they are skulking outside, and your job
is to do all the dangerous work and get what
you can when I’m not looking — for them? And
you will get a fair share? Don’t you believe it! If
you get off alive, you will be lucky.”


Bilbo was now beginning to feel really
uncomfortable. Whenever Smaug’s roving eye,
seeking for him in the shadows, flashed across



him, he trembled, and an unaccountable desire
seized hold of him to rush out and reveal
himself and tell all the truth to Smaug. In fact he
was in grievous danger of coming under the
dragon-spell. But plucking up courage he spoke
again.

“You don’t know everything, O Smaug the
Mighty,” said he. “Not gold alone brought us
hither.”

“Ha! Ha! You admit the ‘us’” laughed
Smaug. “Why not say ‘us fourteen’ and be done
with it, Mr. Lucky Number? I am pleased to hear
that you had other business in these parts
besides my gold. In that case you may,
perhaps, not altogether waste your time.

“I don’t know if it has occurred to you that,
even if you could steal the gold bit by bit — a
matter of a hundred years or so — you could not
get it very far? Not much use on the mountain-
side? Not much use in the forest? Bless me!
Had you never thought of the catch? A
fourteenth share, I suppose, or something like it,
those were the terms, eh? But what about
delivery? What about cartage? What about
armed guards and tolls?” And Smaug laughed
aloud. He had a wicked and a wily heart, and he
knew his guesses were not far out, though he
suspected that the Lake-men were at the back
of the plans, and that most of the plunder was



meant to stop there in the town by the shore that
in his young days had been called Esgaroth.

You will hardly believe it, but poor Bilbo was
really very taken aback. So far all his thoughts
and energies had been concentrated on getting
to the Mountain and finding the entrance. He
had never bothered to wonder how the treasure
was to be removed, certainly never how any
part of it that might fall to his share was to be
brought back all the way to Bag-End Under-Hill.

Now a nasty suspicion began to grow in his
mind — had the dwarves forgotten this important
point too, or were they laughing in their sleeves
at him all the time? That is the effect that
dragon-talk has on the inexperienced. Bilbo of
course ought to have been on his guard; but
Smaug had rather an overwhelming personality.

“I tell you," he said, in an effort to remain
loyal to his friends and to keep his end up, “that
gold was only an afterthought with us. We came
over hill and under hill, by wave and wind, for
Revenge. Surely, O Smaug the unassessably
wealthy, you must realize that your success has
made you some bitter enemies?”

Then Smaug really did laugh — a
devastating sound which shook Bilbo to the
floor, while far up in the tunnel the dwarves
huddled together and imagined that the hobbit
had come to a sudden and a nasty end.



"Revenge!” he snorted, and the light of his
eyes lit the hall from floor to ceiling like scarlet
lightning. ‘‘Revenge! The King under the
Mountain is dead and where are his kin that
dare seek revenge? Girion Lord of Dale is
dead, and I have eaten his people like a wolf
among sheep, and where are his sons’ sons
that dare approach me? I kill where I wish and
none dare resist. I laid low the warriors of old
and their like is not in the world today. Then I
was but young and tender. Now I am old and
strong, strong, strong, Thief in the Shadows!” he
gloated. “My armour is like tenfold shields, my
teeth are swords, my claws spears, the shock
of my tail a thunderbolt, my wings a hurricane,
and my breath death!”

“I have always understood,” said Bilbo in a
frightened squeak, “that dragons were softer
underneath, especially in the region of the — er
— chest; but doubtless one so fortified has
thought of that.”

The dragon stopped short in his boasting.
“Your information is antiquated,” he snapped. “I
am armoured above and below with iron scales
and hard gems. No blade can pierce me.”

“I might have guessed it,” said Bilbo. “Truly
there can nowhere be found the equal of Lord
Smaug the Impenetrable. What magnificence to
possess a waistcoat of fine diamonds!”



“Yes, it is rare and wonderful, indeed,” said
Smaug absurdly pleased. He did not know that
the hobbit had already caught a glimpse of his
peculiar under-covering on his previous visit,
and was itching for a closer view for reasons of
his own. The dragon rolled over. “Look!” he
said. “What do you say to that?”

“Dazzlingly marvellous! Perfect! Flawless!
Staggering!” exclaimed Bilbo aloud, but what
he thought inside was: “Old fool! Why, there is a
large patch in the hollow of his left breast as
bare as a snail out of its shell!”

After he had seen that Mr. Baggins’ one
idea was to get away. “Well, I really must not
detain Your Magnificence any longer,” he said,
“or keep you from much needed rest. Ponies
take some catching, I believe, after a long start.
And so do burglars,” he added as a parting
shot, as he darted back and fled up the tunnel.

It was an unfortunate remark, for the dragon
spouted terrific flames after him, and fast
though he sped up the slope, he had not gone
nearly far enough to be comfortable before the
ghastly head of Smaug was thrust against the
opening behind. Luckily the whole head and
jaws could not squeeze in, but the nostrils sent
forth fire and vapour to pursue him, and he was
nearly overcome, and stumbled blindly on in
great pain and fear. He had been feeling rather



pleased with the cleverness of his conversation
with Smaug, but his mistake at the end shook
him into better sense.

"Never laugh at live dragons, Bilbo you
fool!” he said to himself, and it became a
favourite saying of his later, and passed into a
proverb. ‘‘You aren’t nearly through this
adventure yet,” he added, and that was pretty
true as well.


The afternoon was turning into evening when he
came out again and stumbled and fell in a faint
on the ‘doorstep’. The dwarves revived him,
and doctored his scorches as well as they
could; but it was a long time before the hair on
the back of his head and his heels grew
properly again: it had all been singed and
frizzled right down to the skin. In the meanwhile
his friends did their best to cheer him up; and
they were eager for his story, especially wanting
to know why the dragon had made such an
awful noise, and how Bilbo had escaped.

But the hobbit was worried and
uncomfortable, and they had difficulty in getting
anything out of him. On thinking things over he
was now regretting some of the things he had
said to the dragon, and was not eager to repeat



them. The old thrush was sitting on a rock near
by with his head cocked on one side, listening
to all that was said. It shows what an ill temper
Bilbo was in: he picked up a stone and threw it
at the thrush, which merely fluttered aside and
came back.

“Drat the bird!” said Bilbo crossly. “I believe
he is listening, and I don’t like the look of him.”

“Leave him alone!” said Thorin. “The
thrushes are good and friendly — this is a very
old bird indeed, and is maybe the last left of the
ancient breed that used to live about here, tame
to the hands of my father and grandfather. They
were a long-lived and magical race, and this
might even be one of those that were alive then,
a couple of hundreds of years or more ago. The
Men of Dale used to have the trick of
understanding their language, and used them
for messengers to fly to the Men of the Lake
and elsewhere.”

“Well, he’ll have news to take to Lake-town
all right, if that is what he is after,” said Bilbo;
“though I don’t suppose there are any people
left there that trouble with thrush-language.”

“Why what has happened?” cried the
dwarves. “Do get on with your tale!”

So Bilbo told them all he could remember,
and he confessed that he had a nasty feeling
that the dragon guessed too much from his



riddles added to the camps and the ponies. “I
am sure he knows we came from Lake-town
and had help from there; and I have a horrible
feeling that his next move may be in that
direction. I wish to goodness I had never said
that about Barrel-rider; it would make even a
blind rabbit in these parts think of the Lake-
men.”

“Well, well! It cannot be helped, and it is
difficult not to slip in talking to a dragon, or so I
have always heard,” said Balin anxious to
comfort him. “I think you did very well, if you ask
me — you found out one very useful thing at any
rate, and got home alive, and that is more than
most can say who have had words with the likes
of Smaug. It may be a mercy and a blessing yet
to know of the bare patch in the old Worm’s
diamond waistcoat.”

That turned the conversation, and they all
began discussing dragon-slayings historical,
dubious, and mythical, and the various sorts of
stabs and jabs and undercuts, and the different
arts devices and stratagems by which they had
been accomplished. The general opinion was
that catching a dragon napping was not as easy
as it sounded, and the attempt to stick one or
prod one asleep was more likely to end in
disaster than a bold frontal attack. All the while
they talked the thrush listened, till at last when



the stars began to peep forth, it silently spread
its wings and flew away. And all the while they
talked and the shadows lengthened Bilbo
became more and more unhappy and his
foreboding grew.

At last he interrupted them. “I am sure we
are very unsafe here,” he said, “and I don’t see
the point of sitting here. The dragon has
withered all the pleasant green, and anyway the
night has come and it is cold. But I feel it in my
bones that this place will be attacked again.
Smaug knows now how I came down to his hall,
and you can trust him to guess where the other
end of the tunnel is. He will break all this side of
the Mountain to bits, if necessary, to stop up our
entrance, and if we are smashed with it the
better he will like it.”

“You are very gloomy, Mr. Baggins!” said
Thorin. “Why has not Smaug blocked the lower
end, then, if he is so eager to keep us out? He
has not, or we should have heard him.”

“I don’t know, I don’t know — because at first
he wanted to try and lure me in again, I
suppose, and now perhaps because he is
waiting till after tonight’s hunt, or because he
does not want to damage his bedroom if he can
help it — but I wish you would not argue. Smaug
will be coming out at any minute now, and our
only hope is to get well in the tunnel and shut the



door.”

He seemed so much in earnest that the
dwarves at last did as he said, though they
delayed shutting the door — it seemed a
desperate plan, for no one knew whether or
how they could get it open again from the
inside, and the thought of being shut in a place
from which the only way out led through the
dragon’s lair was not one they liked. Also
everything seemed quite quiet, both outside
and down the tunnel. So for a longish while they
sat inside not far down from the half-open door
and went on talking.

The talk turned to the dragon’s wicked
words about the dwarves. Bilbo wished he had
never heard them, or at least that he could feel
quite certain that the dwarves now were
absolutely honest when they declared that they
had never thought at all about what would
happen after the treasure had been won. “We
knew it would be a desperate venture,” said
Thorin, “and we know that still; and I still think
that when we have won it will be time enough to
think what to do about it. As for your share, Mr.
Baggins, I assure you we are more than grateful
and you shall choose your own fourteenth, as
soon as we have anything to divide. I am sorry if
you are worried about transport, and I admit the
difficulties are great — the lands have not



become less wild with the passing of time,
rather the reverse — but we will do whatever we
can for you, and take our share of the cost when
the time comes. Believe me or not as you like!”

From that the talk turned to the great hoard
itself and to the things that Thorin and Balin
remembered. They wondered if they were still
lying there unharmed in the hall below: the
spears that were made for the armies of the
great King Bladorthin (long since dead), each
had a thrice-forged head and their shafts were
inlaid with cunning gold, but they were never
delivered or paid for; shields made for warriors
long dead; the great golden cup of Thror, two-
handed, hammered and carven with birds and
flowers whose eyes and petals were of jewels;
coats of mail gilded and silvered and
impenetrable; the necklace of Girion, Lord of
Dale, made of five hundred emeralds green as
grass, which he gave for the arming of his
eldest son in a coat of dwarf-linked rings the
like of which had never been made before, for it
was wrought of pure silver to the power and
strength of triple steel. But fairest of all was the
great white gem, which the dwarves had found
beneath the roots of the Mountain, the Heart of
the Mountain, the Arkenstone of Thrain.

“The Arkenstone! The Arkenstone!”
murmured Thorin in the dark, half dreaming with



his chin upon his knees. “It was like a globe with
a thousand facets; it shone like silver in the
firelight, like water in the sun, like snow under
the stars, like rain upon the Moon!”

But the enchanted desire of the hoard had
fallen from Bilbo. All through their talk he was
only half listening to them. He sat nearest to the
door with one ear cocked for any beginnings of
a sound without, his other was alert for echoes
beyond the murmurs of the dwarves, for any
whisper of a movement from far below.

Darkness grew deeper and he grew ever
more uneasy. “Shut the door!” he begged them,
“I fear that dragon in my marrow. I like this
silence far less than the uproar of last night.
Shut the door before it is too late!”

Something in his voice gave the dwarves
an uncomfortable feeling. Slowly Thorin shook
off his dreams and getting up he kicked away
the stone that wedged the door. Then they thrust
upon it, and it closed with a snap and a clang.
No trace of a keyhole was there left on the
inside. They were shut in the Mountain!

And not a moment too soon. They had
hardly gone any distance down the tunnel when
a blow smote the side of the Mountain like the
crash of battering-rams made of forest oaks
and swung by giants. The rock boomed, the
walls cracked and stones fell from the roof on



their heads. What would have happened if the
door had still been open I don’t like to think.
They fled further down the tunnel glad to be still
alive, while behind them outside they heard the
roar and rumble of Smaug’s fury. He was
breaking rocks to pieces, smashing wall and
cliff with the lashings of his huge tail, till their
little lofty camping ground, the scorched grass,
the thrush’s stone, the snail-covered walls, the
narrow ledge, and all disappeared in a jumble
of smithereens, and an avalanche of splintered
stones fell over the cliff into the valley below.

Smaug had left his lair in silent stealth,
quietly soared into the air, and then floated
heavy and slow in the dark like a monstrous
crow, down the wind towards the west of the
Mountain, in the hopes of catching unawares
something or somebody there, and of spying
the outlet to the passage which the thief had
used. This was the outburst of his wrath when
he could find nobody and see nothing, even
where he guessed the outlet must actually be.

After he had let off his rage in this way he
felt better and he thought in his heart that he
would not be troubled again from that direction.
In the meanwhile he had further vengeance to
take. “Barrel-rider!” he snorted. “Your feet came
from the waterside and up the water you came
without a doubt. I don’t know your smell, but if



you are not one of those men of the Lake, you
had their help. They shall see me and
remember who is the real King under the
Mountain!”

He rose in fire and went away south
towards the Running River.




Chapter X III


NOT AT HOME


In the meanwhile, the dwarves sat in darkness,
and utter silence fell about them. Little they ate
and little they spoke. They could not count the
passing of time; and they scarcely dared to
move, for the whisper of their voices echoed
and rustled in the tunnel. If they dozed, they
woke still to darkness and to silence going on
unbroken. At last after days and days of waiting,
as it seemed, when they were becoming
choked and dazed for want of air, they could
bear it no longer. They would almost have
welcomed sounds from below of the dragon’s
return. In the silence they feared some cunning
devilry of his, but they could not sit there for
ever.

Thorin spoke: “Let us try the door!” he said.
“I must feel the wind on my face soon or die. I
think I would rather be smashed by Smaug in
the open than suffocate in here!” So several of


the dwarves got up and groped back to where
the door had been. But they found that the
upper end of the tunnel had been shattered and
blocked with broken rock. Neither key nor the
magic it had once obeyed would ever open that
door again.

“We are trapped!” they groaned. “This is the
end. We shall die here.”

But somehow, just when the dwarves were
most despairing, Bilbo felt a strange lightening
of the heart, as if a heavyweight had gone from
under his waistcoat.

“Come, come!” he said. ‘“While there’s life
there’s hope!’ as my father used to say, and
Third time pays for all.’ I am going down the
tunnel once again. I have been that way twice,
when I knew there was a dragon at the other
end, so I will risk a third visit when I am no
longer sure. Anyway the only way out is down.
And I think this time you had better all come with
me.”

In desperation they agreed, and Thorin was
the first to go forward by Bilbo’s side.

"Now do be careful!” whispered the hobbit,
“and as quiet as you can be! There may be no
Smaug at the bottom, but then again there may
be. Don’t let us take any unnecessary risks!”

Down, down they went. The dwarves could
not, of course, compare with the hobbit in real



stealth, and they made a deal of puffing and
shuffling which echoes magnified alarmingly;
but though every now and again Bilbo in fear
stopped and listened, not a sound stirred
below. Near the bottom, as well as he could
judge, Bilbo slipped on his ring and went
ahead. But he did not need it: the darkness was
complete, and they were all invisible, ring or no
ring. In fact so black was it that the hobbit came
to the opening unexpectedly, put his hand on
air, stumbled forward, and rolled headlong into
the hall!

There he lay face downwards on the floor
and did not dare to get up, or hardly even to
breathe. But nothing moved. There was not a
gleam of light — unless, as it seemed to him,
when at last he slowly raised his head, there
was a pale white glint, above him and far off in
the gloom. But certainly it was not a spark of
dragon-fire, though the worm-stench was heavy
in the place, and the taste of vapour was on his
tongue.

At length Mr. Baggins could bear it no
longer. “Confound you, Smaug, you worm!” he
squeaked aloud. “Stop playing hide-and-seek!
Give me a light, and then eat me, if you can
catch me!”

Faint echoes ran round the unseen hall, but
there was no answer.



Bilbo got up, and found that he did not know
in what direction to turn.

"Now I wonder what on earth Smaug is
playing at,” he said. “He is not at home today
(or tonight, or whatever it is), I do believe. If Oin
and Gloin have not lost their tinder-boxes,
perhaps we can make a little light, and have a
look round before the luck turns.”

“Light!” he cried. “Can anybody make a
light?”


The dwarves, of course, were very alarmed
when Bilbo fell forward down the step with a
bump into the hall, and they sat huddled just
where he had left them at the end of the tunnel.

“Sh! sh!” they hissed, when they heard his
voice; and though that helped the hobbit to find
out where they were, it was some time before
he could get anything else out of them. But in
the end, when Bilbo actually began to stamp on
the floor, and screamed out “light!” at the top of
his shrill voice, Thorin gave way, and Oin and
Gloin were sent back to their bundles at the top
of the tunnel.

After a while a twinkling gleam showed
them returning, Oin with a small pine-torch alight
in his hand, and Gloin with a bundle of others



under his arm. Quickly Bilbo trotted to the door
and took the torch; but he could not persuade
the dwarves to light the others or to come and
join him yet. As Thorin carefully explained, Mr.
Baggins was still officially their expert burglar
and investigator. If he liked to risk a light, that
was his affair. They would wait in the tunnel for
his report. So they sat near the door and
watched.

They saw the little dark shape of the hobbit
start across the floor holding his tiny light aloft.
Every now and again, while he was still near
enough, they caught a glint and a tinkle as he
stumbled on some golden thing. The light grew
smaller as he wandered away into the vast hall;
then it began to rise dancing into the air. Bilbo
was climbing the great mound of treasure.
Soon he stood upon the top, and still went on.
Then they saw him halt and stoop for a moment;
but they did not know the reason.

It was the Arkenstone, the Heart of the
Mountain. So Bilbo guessed from Thorin’s
description; but indeed there could not be two
such gems, even in so marvellous a hoard,
even in all the world. Ever as he climbed, the
same white gleam had shone before him and
drawn his feet towards it. Slowly it grew to a
little globe of pallid light. Now as he came near,
it was tinged with a flickering sparkle of many



colours at the surface, reflected and splintered
from the wavering light of his torch. At last he
looked down upon it, and he caught his breath.
The great jewel shone before his feet of its own
inner light, and yet, cut and fashioned by the
dwarves, who had dug it from the heart of the
mountain long ago, it took all light that fell upon
it and changed it into ten thousand sparks of
white radiance shot with glints of the rainbow.

Suddenly Bilbo’s arm went towards it drawn
by its enchantment. His small hand would not
close about it, for it was a large and heavy gem;
but he lifted it, shut his eyes, and put it in his
deepest pocket.

"Now I am a burglar indeed!” thought he.
“But I suppose I must tell the dwarves about it —
some time. They did say I could pick and
choose my own share; and I think I would
choose this, if they took all the rest!” All the
same he had an uncomfortable feeling that the
picking and choosing had not really been meant
to include this marvellous gem, and that trouble
would yet come of it.

Now he went on again. Down the other side
of the great mound he climbed, and the spark of
his torch vanished from the sight of the watching
dwarves. But soon they saw it far away in the
distance again. Bilbo was crossing the floor of
the hall.



He went on, until he came to the great
doors at the further side, and there a draught of
air refreshed him, but it almost puffed out his
light. He peeped timidly through, and caught a
glimpse of great passages and of the dim
beginnings of wide stairs going up into the
gloom. And still there was no sight nor sound of
Smaug. He was just going to turn and go back,
when a black shape swooped at him, and
brushed his face. He squeaked and started,
stumbled backwards and fell. His torch dropped
head downwards and went out!

“Only a bat, I suppose and hope!” he said
miserably. “But now what am I to do? Which is
East, South, North, or West?”

“Thorin! Balin! Oin! Gloin! Fili! Kili!” he cried
as loud as he could — it seemed a thin little
noise in the wide blackness. “The light’s gone
out! Someone come and find me and help me!”
For the moment his courage had failed
altogether.

Faintly the dwarves heard his small cries,
though the only word they could catch was
“help!”

“Now what on earth or under it has
happened?” said Thorin. “Certainly not the
dragon, or he would not go on squeaking.”

They waited a moment or two, and still there
were no dragon-noises, no sound at all in fact



but Bilbo’s distant voice. “Come, one of you,
get another light or two!” Thorin ordered. “It
seems we have got to go and help our burglar.”

“It is about our turn to help,” said Balin, “and
I am quite willing to go. Anyway I expect it is
safe for the moment.”

Gloin lit several more torches, and then they
all crept out, one by one, and went along the
wall as hurriedly as they could. It was not long
before they met Bilbo himself coming back
towards them. His wits had quickly returned as
soon as he saw the twinkle of their lights.

“Only a bat and a dropped torch, nothing
worse!” he said in answer to their questions.
Though they were much relieved, they were
inclined to be grumpy at being frightened for
nothing; but what they would have said, if he
had told them at that moment about the
Arkenstone, I don’t know. The mere fleeting
glimpses of treasure which they had caught as
they went along had rekindled all the fire of their
dwarvish hearts; and when the heart of a dwarf,
even the most respectable, is wakened by gold
and by jewels, he grows suddenly bold, and he
may become fierce.

The dwarves indeed no longer needed any
urging. All were now eager to explore the hall
while they had the chance, and willing to believe
that, for the present, Smaug was away from



home. Each now gripped a lighted torch; and
as they gazed, first on one side and then on
another, they forgot fear and even caution. They
spoke aloud, and cried out to one another, as
they lifted old treasures from the mound or from
the wall and held them in the light, caressing
and fingering them.

Fili and Kili were almost in merry mood,
and finding still hanging there many golden
harps strung with silver they took them and
struck them; and being magical (and also
untouched by the dragon, who had small
interest in music) they were still in tune. The
dark hall was filled with a melody that had long
been silent. But most of the dwarves were more
practical: they gathered gems and stuffed their
pockets, and let what they could not carry fall
back through their fingers with a sigh. Thorin
was not least among these; but always he
searched from side to side for something which
he could not find. It was the Arkenstone; but he
spoke of it yet to no one.

Now the dwarves took down mail and
weapons from the walls, and armed
themselves. Royal indeed did Thorin look, clad
in a coat of gold-plated rings, with a silver-
hafted axe in a belt crusted with scarlet stones.

“Mr. Baggins!” he cried. “Here is the first
payment of your reward! Cast off your old coat



and put on this!”

With that he put on Bilbo a small coat of
mail, wrought for some young elf-prince long
ago. It was of silver-steel, which the elves call
mithril, and with it went a belt of pearls and
crystals. A light helm of figured leather,
strengthened beneath with hoops of steel, and
studded about the brim with white gems, was
set upon the hobbit’s head.

“I feel magnificent,” he thought; “but I expect
I look rather absurd. How they would laugh on
the Hill at home! Still I wish there was a looking-
glass handy!”

All the same Mr. Baggins kept his head
more clear of the bewitchment of the hoard than
the dwarves did. Long before the dwarves were
tired of examining the treasures, he became
weary of it and sat down on the floor; and he
began to wonder nervously what the end of it all
would be. “I would give a good many of these
precious goblets,” he thought, “for a drink of
something cheering out of one of Beorn’s
wooden bowls!”

“Thorin!” he cried aloud. “What next? We
are armed, but what good has any armour ever
been before against Smaug the Dreadful? This
treasure is not yet won back. We are not
looking for gold yet, but for a way of escape;
and we have tempted luck too long!”



“You speak the truth!” answered Thorin,
recovering his wits. “Let us go! I will guide you.
Not in a thousand years should I forget the ways
of this palace.” Then he hailed the others, and
they gathered together, and holding their
torches above their heads they passed through
the gaping doors, not without many a backward
glance of longing.

Their glittering mail they had covered again
with their old cloaks and their bright helms with
their tattered hoods, and one by one they
walked behind Thorin, a line of little lights in the
darkness that halted often, listening in fear once
more for any rumour of the dragon’s coming.

Though all the old adornments were long
mouldered or destroyed, and though all was
befouled and blasted with the comings and
goings of the monster, Thorin knew every
passage and every turn. They climbed long
stairs, and turned and went down wide echoing
ways, and turned again and climbed yet more
stairs, and yet more stairs again. These were
smooth, cut out of the living rock broad and fair;
and up, up, the dwarves went, and they met no
sign of any living thing, only furtive shadows that
fled from the approach of their torches fluttering
in the draughts.

The steps were not made, all the same, for
hobbit-legs, and Bilbo was just feeling that he



could go on no longer, when suddenly the roof
sprang high and far beyond the reach of their
torch-light. A white glimmer could be seen
coming through some opening far above, and
the air smelt sweeter. Before them light came
dimly through great doors, that hung twisted on
their hinges and half burnt.

“This is the great chamber of Thror,” said
Thorin; “the hall of feasting and of council. Not
far off now is the Front Gate.”

They passed through the ruined chamber.
Tables were rotting there; chairs and benches
were lying there overturned, charred and
decaying. Skulls and bones were upon the floor
among flagons and bowls and broken drinking-
horns and dust. As they came through yet more
doors at the further end, a sound of water fell
upon their ears, and the grey light grew
suddenly more full.

“There is the birth of the Running River,”
said Thorin. “From here it hastens to the Gate.
Let us follow it!”

Out of a dark opening in a wall of rock there
issued a boiling water, and it flowed swirling in
a narrow channel, carved and made straight
and deep by the cunning of ancient hands.
Beside it ran a stone-paved road, wide enough
for many men abreast. Swiftly along this they
ran, and round a wide-sweeping turn — and



behold! before them stood the broad light of
day. In front there rose a tall arch, still showing
the fragments of old carven work within, worn
and splintered and blackened though it was. A
misty sun sent its pale light between the arms of
the Mountain, and beams of gold fell on the
pavement at the threshold.

A whirl of bats frightened from slumber by
their smoking torches flurried over them; as they
sprang forward their feet slithered on stones
rubbed smooth and slimed by the passing of
the dragon. Now before them the water fell
noisily outward and foamed down towards the
valley. They flung their pale torches to the
ground, and stood gazing out with dazzled
eyes. They were come to the Front Gate, and
were looking out upon Dale.

“Well!” said Bilbo, “I never expected to be
looking out of this door. And I never expected to
be so pleased to see the sun again, and to feel
the wind on my face. But, ow! this wind is cold!”

It was. A bitter easterly breeze blew with a
threat of oncoming winter. It swirled over and
round the arms of the Mountain into the valley,
and sighed among the rocks. After their long
time in the stewing depths of the dragon-
haunted caverns, they shivered in the sun.

Suddenly Bilbo realized that he was not only
tired but also very hungry indeed. “It seems to



be late morning,” he said, ‘‘and so I suppose it
is more or less breakfast-time — if there is any
breakfast to have. But I don’t feel that Smaug’s
front doorstep is the safest place for a meal. Do
let’s go somewhere where we can sit quiet for a
bit!”

“Quite right!” said Balin. “And I think I know
which way we should go: we ought to make for
the old look-out post at the South-West corner
of the Mountain.”

“How far is that?” asked the hobbit.

“Five hours march, I should think. It will be
rough going. The road from the Gate along the
left edge of the stream seems all broken up. But
look down there! The river loops suddenly east
across Dale in front of the ruined town. At that
point there was once a bridge, leading to steep
stairs that climbed up the right bank, and so to
a road running towards Ravenhill. There is (or
was) a path that left the road and climbed up to
the post. A hard climb, too, even if the old steps
are still there.”

“Dear me!” grumbled the hobbit. “More
walking and more climbing without breakfast! I
wonder how many breakfasts, and other meals,
we have missed inside that nasty clockless,
timeless hole?”

As a matter of fact two nights and the day
between had gone by (and not altogether



without food) since the dragon smashed the
magic door, but Bilbo had quite lost count, and
it might have been one night or a week of nights
for all he could tell.

“Come, come!” said Thorin laughing — his
spirits had begun to rise again, and he rattled
the precious stones in his pockets. “Don’t call
my palace a nasty hole! You wait till it has been
cleaned and redecorated!”

“That won’t be till Smaug’s dead,” said
Bilbo glumly. “In the meanwhile where is he? I
would give a good breakfast to know. I hope he
is not up on the Mountain looking down at us!”

That idea disturbed the dwarves mightily,
and they quickly decided that Bilbo and Balin
were right.

“We must move away from here,” said Dori.
“I feel as if his eyes were on the back of my
head.”

“It’s a cold lonesome place,” said Bombur.
“There may be drink, but I see no sign of food.
A dragon would always be hungry in such
parts.”

“Come on! Come on!” cried the others. “Let
us follow Balin’s path!”


Under the rocky wall to the right there was no



path, so on they trudged among the stones on
the left side of the river, and the emptiness and
desolation soon sobered even Thorin again.
The bridge that Balin had spoken of they found
long fallen, and most of its stones were now
only boulders in the shallow noisy stream; but
they forded the water without much difficulty,
and found the ancient steps, and climbed the
high bank. After going a short way they struck
the old road, and before long came to a deep
dell sheltered among the rocks; there they
rested for a while and had such a breakfast as
they could, chiefly cram and water. (If you want
to know what cram is, I can only say that I don’t
know the recipe; but it is biscuitish, keeps good
indefinitely, is supposed to be sustaining, and
is certainly not entertaining, being in fact very
uninteresting except as a chewing exercise. It
was made by the Lake-men for long journeys.)

After that they went on again; and now the
road struck westwards and left the river, and the
great shoulder of the south-pointing mountain-
spur drew ever nearer. At length they reached
the hill path. It scrambled steeply up, and they
plodded slowly one behind the other, till at last
in the late afternoon they came to the top of the
ridqe and saw the wintry sun qoinq downwards
to the West.

Here they found a flat place without a wall



on three sides, but backed to the North by a
rocky face in which there was an opening like a
door. From that door there was a wide view
East and South and West.

“Here,” said Balin, “in the old days we used
always to keep watchmen, and that door behind
leads into a rockhewn chamber that was made
here as a guardroom. There were several
places like it round the Mountain. But there
seemed small need for watching in the days of
our prosperity, and the guards were made over
comfortable, perhaps — otherwise we might
have had longer warning of the coming of the
dragon, and things might have been different.
Still, here we can now lie hid and sheltered for a
while, and can see much without being seen.”